[Amit Varma]: Ever since our independence 73 years ago, the neighbor we've been obsessed with is Pakistan.
[Amit Varma]: This is not surprising as until recently we lived in the same damn house and we were the
[Amit Varma]: same damn people.
[Amit Varma]: With the history we have had and the violence of our separation, it is natural that India
[Amit Varma]: and Pakistan should think so much about each other.
[Amit Varma]: But in all this time, we haven't thought much about another neighbor, a country bigger than
[Amit Varma]: us, an economy more prosperous, a civilization just as old, a neighbor separated by just
[Amit Varma]: the Himalayas.
[Amit Varma]: In the geopolitics of our popular culture, the enemy is always Pakistan, never China.
[Amit Varma]: But China is the big brother of our neighborhood.
[Amit Varma]: And hey, they did actually meet us in a war and we are embroiled in multiple disputes
[Amit Varma]: with them.
[Amit Varma]: Should we be worried?
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Scene and The Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Unknown]: science.
[Amit Varma]: Please welcome your host, Amit Bhadwa.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Scene and The Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: We can't understand the present without understanding the past.
[Amit Varma]: And given the recent bust-ups between China and India in the Galwan Valley, we do need
[Amit Varma]: to understand what is going on.
[Amit Varma]: Today's episode looks back at the history of the interactions between China and India.
[Amit Varma]: First, a bird's eye view that spans centuries and looks at the difference between our civilizational
[Amit Varma]: approaches.
[Amit Varma]: Then we zoom into British times, in which many of our current border disputes were born,
[Amit Varma]: as the British Empire grappled with China and the questions of how far they could go
[Amit Varma]: and how far they wanted to go.
[Amit Varma]: Then we zoom in further to our independence and the changed dynamics of the Cold War.
[Amit Varma]: We see why the 1962 war happened and how the aftermath unfolded.
[Amit Varma]: And then, through the decades, we come to these present times, when China asserts its
[Amit Varma]: strength as India struggles to define its place in the world.
[Amit Varma]: My guests today are Hamsini Hariharan and Shibani Mehta.
[Amit Varma]: Hamsini is the host of The States of Anarchy, a podcast on global affairs and foreign policy.
[Amit Varma]: She is a Yenching Scholar at Peking University.
[Amit Varma]: She researches on Chinese politics and policy.
[Amit Varma]: She used to be a research associate at the Takshashila Institution and the assistant
[Amit Varma]: editor at Pragati at the time when I was the editor there, and our entire editorial team
[Amit Varma]: was basically the two of us.
[Amit Varma]: UNESCO recently certified us as the greatest two-person editorial team in world history.
[Amit Varma]: Shibani is a foreign affairs researcher and writer based in Bangalore.
[Amit Varma]: She contributes to Eye on China, a weekly bulletin offering news and analysis related
[Amit Varma]: to the Middle Kingdom.
[Amit Varma]: She is writing about China's engagement in the Indian subcontinent for a forthcoming
[Amit Varma]: Routledge publication, along with Manoj Kevalramani, who has been on the show a few times to talk
[Amit Varma]: about China.
[Amit Varma]: Those episodes will be linked from the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: Before I begin my conversation with Hamsini and Shibani though, let's take a quick commercial
[Amit Varma]: break.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoy listening to The Seen and the Unseen, you can play a part in keeping the
[Amit Varma]: show alive.
[Amit Varma]: The Seen and the Unseen has been a labour of love for me.
[Amit Varma]: I've enjoyed putting together many stimulating conversations, expanding my brain and my universe,
[Amit Varma]: and hopefully yours as well.
[Amit Varma]: But while the work has been its own reward, I don't actually make much money off the show.
[Amit Varma]: Although The Seen and the Unseen has great numbers, advertisers haven't really woken
[Amit Varma]: up to the insane engagement level of podcasts, and I do many many hours of deep research
[Amit Varma]: for each episode, besides all the logistics of producing the show myself, scheduling guests,
[Amit Varma]: booking studios, paying technicians, the travel and so on.
[Amit Varma]: So well, I'm trying a new way of keeping this thing going, and that involves you.
[Amit Varma]: My proposition for you is this, for every episode of The Seen and the Unseen that you
[Amit Varma]: enjoy, buy me a cup of coffee, or even a lavish lunch, whatever you feel it's worth.
[Amit Varma]: You can do this by heading over to seenunseen.in slash support and contributing an amount of
[Amit Varma]: your choice.
[Amit Varma]: This is not a subscription.
[Amit Varma]: The Seen and the Unseen will continue to be free on all podcast apps and at seenunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: This is just a gesture of appreciation.
[Amit Varma]: Help keep this thing going, seenunseen.in slash support.
[Guest 2]: Hamsini and Shibani, welcome to The Seen and the Unseen.
[Guest 2]: Thanks for having us, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, Hamsini, long time since we've actually spoken, we were colleagues for the
[Amit Varma]: longest time, you've come on at least a couple of episodes of The Seen and the Unseen in
[Amit Varma]: the past.
[Amit Varma]: So how has life been treating you?
[Guest 2]: It's been good, Amit.
[Guest 2]: I was thinking about, you know, I don't know if you know this, Shibani, but when we first
[Guest 2]: started doing editorial meets, Amit and I had this tradition of going to Blossoms, and
[Guest 2]: then we'd go over to the Starbucks across the street and sit there, compare purchases,
[Guest 2]: and then sit down and talk about like, what was going to go on with Pragati.
[Guest 2]: And when we first started this, I think Church Street was at that point in time, going through
[Guest 2]: renovations.
[Guest 2]: So it was literally like you had to dodge and walk on some of these wooden planks that
[Guest 2]: were on the street.
[Guest 2]: And at one point, I remember Amit turning and saying to me, you know, we should really
[Guest 2]: go in a single file, because if the both of us die, then that's it for Pragati, we're
[Guest 2]: completely done.
[Guest 2]: And yeah, so it's been a long time since we've been holding the soul of Pragati in our feet
[Guest 2]: on Church Street, Amit, but life has been good.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I don't remember this wooden plank thing, but it sounds like just the kind of morbid
[Amit Varma]: thing that I would say.
[Amit Varma]: And I must here tell my listeners something that they've probably heard before from me
[Amit Varma]: that Church Street is basically the best street in the world, partly because you know, there's
[Amit Varma]: Takshashila with that captive studio and all the wonderful people who work there, including
[Amit Varma]: you guys at one point in time, and plus Blossoms in the Starbucks.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, I was recording with Ram Guha once in the Takshashila studio, when we were
[Amit Varma]: doing our Gandhi episodes.
[Amit Varma]: And at the end of that, I said that, you know, he said, Okay, where are you going?
[Amit Varma]: What are you up to?
[Amit Varma]: I said that I'm now going to go to the best bookshop in the world, which is Blossoms.
[Amit Varma]: And he said, best bookshop in the world, you fool, it's not even the best bookshop on Church
[Amit Varma]: Street, by which there's another store called Bookworm, which is very nice, where I went
[Amit Varma]: and found a secondhand copy of my own book.
[Amit Varma]: And I was like, how good can this shop be?
[Guest 2]: Clearly, it's great, Amit, I mean, if it has secondhand versions of your book.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, so our listeners are now like, this is supposed to be an episode about India and
[Amit Varma]: China.
[Amit Varma]: Let's start talking about that.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, before that, I want to get a sense of, Hamsini, starting with you, how
[Amit Varma]: you got drawn to China, in the sense your master's degree also has to do with China.
[Amit Varma]: And after that, you went to China, and you were actually a student there.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, you're studying in Beijing.
[Amit Varma]: Now, of course, you're back in Chennai, and, you know, waiting for all of this to end,
[Amit Varma]: and bemoaning the loss of WeChat.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about how the journey has been, what got you interested in, say,
[Amit Varma]: international relations to begin with, and then China?
[Amit Varma]: And what was sort of your experience in China, like, while you were there?
[Guest 2]: Okay, so there are different versions to this story.
[Guest 2]: One is, you know, the one that my parents are most proud of is, you know, when I was
[Guest 2]: eight, I said I wanted to be like Kofi Annan, and they were like, yes, this girl is going
[Guest 2]: to go into the civil services.
[Guest 2]: And then I rebelled, like every other person in this country, and I really didn't want
[Guest 2]: I actually did my bachelor's in journalism.
[Guest 2]: And when I was doing my bachelor's, I did one of my internships at a Tibetan newspaper
[Guest 2]: based in Dharamsala.
[Guest 2]: And my whole point was that I wanted to spend a summer in Dharamsala more than anything
[Guest 2]: else.
[Guest 2]: And that experience really changed me, I think.
[Guest 2]: So you know, while I now go to Beijing, and everyone calls me sort of a China apologist
[Guest 2]: to various degrees, I think my journey really started out with knowing nothing about China
[Guest 2]: or Tibet, but staying there for a month or two, and just really realizing sort of the
[Guest 2]: boundaries of my knowledge about the world.
[Guest 2]: And that's when I realized that I wanted to study more about international relations.
[Guest 2]: And I did a master's in India, before I worked at the Takshashila Institution and Pragati.
[Guest 2]: And even during my master's, China was sort of the thing that was always lurking at the
[Guest 2]: back of my mind, I didn't have a specific region or a focus like a lot of other people
[Guest 2]: did.
[Guest 2]: But I realized that I enjoyed reading about China, and very few people knew about it.
[Guest 2]: So I wanted to dive more into it.
[Guest 2]: I think when I was in Takshashila, even when I was working with you, I was doing these
[Guest 2]: Mandarin classes on the side and learning more about the language.
[Guest 2]: And none of that was useful when I finally went to China, because you know, while I could
[Guest 2]: read and write quite decently, I think my speaking was just horrible, because I'd had
[Guest 2]: no practice whatsoever.
[Guest 2]: So I'm doing my second master's in China at Peking University, which is a very good university
[Guest 2]: and I was having a wonderful time until the pandemic hit and I was sort of forced to come
[Guest 2]: back home.
[Guest 2]: So I am waiting out the pandemic until the international borders reopen and I can go
[Guest 2]: back and finish my research.
[Amit Varma]: And Shibani to turn to you, you've also been into international relations for the longest
[Amit Varma]: time.
[Amit Varma]: And then you also got into China, not that you've specialized in only that, but that's
[Amit Varma]: been one of the key areas on which you've been working and you were at Takshashila till
[Amit Varma]: recently as well.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a bit about your journey, why international relations, because that's not the kind of
[Amit Varma]: thing young people get drawn to, right?
[Guest 1]: So what happened?
[Guest 1]: For me, I also had aspirations like Hamsini to join the foreign services and which is
[Guest 1]: why I was studying history, economics and political science as an undergraduate.
[Guest 1]: And international relations was this discipline that combined all of those interests for me.
[Guest 1]: So immediately after I finished college, I went to do my master's and I went to Singapore.
[Guest 1]: I would say my scholarly sort of journey with China is fairly recent.
[Guest 1]: I've only started working on China and related issues in the last year, but my introduction
[Guest 1]: happened when I was doing my master's because Singapore has a lot of Chinese students.
[Guest 1]: So I was introduced to it in the classroom where you have classmates from China talking
[Guest 1]: about the Chinese take on issues that were being discussed.
[Guest 1]: But at the time, I was completely obsessed with international terrorism.
[Guest 1]: That's what I wanted to study for the rest of my life and wanted to become a war correspondent
[Guest 1]: and things like that.
[Guest 1]: So that's what I was doing.
[Guest 1]: But on the side also, hanging out with people from China, listening to what they had to
[Guest 1]: say about issues of international politics.
[Guest 1]: And yeah, so I kind of wandered.
[Guest 1]: And at Takshashila, I used to hang out with Hamsini and Manoj and just like chat with
[Guest 1]: them to know more.
[Guest 1]: It was nothing more than that.
[Guest 1]: But yeah, in the last year, it's become a little more formal.
[Guest 1]: I'm studying China's engagement in the Indian subcontinent, trying to look at the Indian
[Guest 1]: point of view, what is the Indian perception of China and stuff.
[Amit Varma]: And I have a couple of broad questions I'd like, you know, both of you to sort of take
[Amit Varma]: on which is, you know, before we get to the subject at hand, which is, one is that, you
[Amit Varma]: know, when we start learning about a subject, and this is a process I've seen that happens
[Amit Varma]: to all of us, and is especially interesting when one is young and getting into a subject,
[Amit Varma]: is that you shall, for example, leave China and IR out of it for a while, let's say, how
[Amit Varma]: do you frame the way that you look at the world.
[Amit Varma]: And a lot of young people when they find a theory that sort of contains a worldview and
[Amit Varma]: contains a frame through which they can decipher the world, they get enamored by it.
[Amit Varma]: And all they can see for a while is, you know, that framework.
[Amit Varma]: So they're using that hammer to break every nail.
[Amit Varma]: For example, there's a joke about how if you're not a communist at 18, you don't have a heart.
[Amit Varma]: And if you're not a capitalist at 32, you don't have a brain, something to that effect.
[Amit Varma]: There are many sort of versions of that.
[Amit Varma]: And it sort of strikes me that when you guys get into international relations, for example,
[Amit Varma]: there are all these different frames to which you look at the world.
[Amit Varma]: Or when you talk about China and China's engagement with the world, there are all these different
[Amit Varma]: frames.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, the moment you come across one theory that seems so good, and your eyes just
[Amit Varma]: open and you're like, wow, this explains everything, then how seductive is that?
[Amit Varma]: And how easy is it then to sort of, you know, keep your mind open and just keep taking in
[Amit Varma]: influences from all sides?
[Amit Varma]: And at what point like, so have you guys sort of, you know, been through this sort of journey
[Amit Varma]: in, you know, learning about IR and learning about China?
[Amit Varma]: Hamsini?
[Guest 2]: Yeah, I mean, I think for myself, I've definitely gone through that.
[Guest 2]: I think even my podcast, the concept of, you know, states of anarchy comes from the first
[Guest 2]: time I heard about the concept of anarchy sitting in international relations.
[Guest 2]: It really sort of blew my mind.
[Guest 2]: And it hasn't stopped blowing my mind.
[Guest 2]: But what I also learned very early on, is I came across opposing viewpoints, particularly
[Guest 2]: from people who thought that concepts of realism really discounted domestic processes, really
[Guest 2]: discounted behaviours of certain states, really discounted histories, which were not Western
[Guest 2]: histories.
[Guest 2]: And so it was sort of good to go up against those and see how other people felt about
[Guest 2]: these theories.
[Guest 2]: But something that I say for myself, at least, is that learning about international relations
[Guest 2]: helps me understand and make more sense of the world around me.
[Guest 2]: And I think that's something that's definitely true of international relations theory as
[Guest 2]: well.
[Amit Varma]: Can you briefly elaborate on that?
[Amit Varma]: What do you mean learning about international relations makes you help sense of the world
[Amit Varma]: about that?
[Amit Varma]: Because that's what I say about economics.
[Amit Varma]: Now, if you start saying that about international relations, it just gets very confusing for
[Amit Varma]: the listener.
[Guest 2]: What am I supposed to study to make sense of the world?
[Guest 2]: You know, economics, sure, Amit, we've always had this thing where I've seen you talk about
[Guest 2]: like things like household economics, at least when we were at Prakriti.
[Guest 2]: But for me, foreign policy theories really help you make sense of the world, in the sense
[Guest 2]: of they also consider that players are rational actors.
[Guest 2]: They also consider decision making.
[Guest 2]: What's very interesting for me is that they consider the international system, for the
[Guest 2]: large part, is amoral.
[Guest 2]: And that has really helped me figure out debates in my own life.
[Guest 2]: And I think sort of the existing conditions for international relations is something that
[Guest 2]: I've sort of applied to my own world view, whether it's the way power works, or the way
[Guest 2]: networks work, or just the lack of a hierarchical system in the world at large.
[Guest 2]: I think those are just concepts that make me understand how everything ticks.
[Amit Varma]: That's fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: Shabani, what about you?
[Amit Varma]: What's your sort of learning through IR been like?
[Amit Varma]: Like, was there sort of a particular school of thought which was attractive to you to
[Amit Varma]: begin with?
[Amit Varma]: And also, how do you sort of, you know, a question I guess you could ask a scholar in
[Amit Varma]: any field, how do you increase your knowledge?
[Amit Varma]: How do you figure out what to read?
[Guest 1]: How do you organize whatever you're learning?
[Guest 1]: I was definitely influenced by one school of thought when I first started studying international
[Guest 1]: relations.
[Guest 1]: And that was because the professor that was teaching us IR theory belonged to a particular
[Guest 1]: school of thought.
[Guest 1]: So for me to question a teacher was a very new concept.
[Guest 1]: It was not something that we had been introduced to in the Indian education system, unfortunately.
[Guest 1]: So I was like, whatever he's saying is like final, right, it can't be anything else.
[Guest 1]: And then in my second term, I encountered another professor who came from the completely
[Guest 1]: like different school of thought and I was as enamored by him.
[Guest 1]: And that's when I realized that I have to, you know, you have to figure it out for yourself.
[Guest 1]: Initially there was this urgency to be like, who am I, where do I fit in?
[Guest 1]: What is the label that I would put on myself?
[Guest 1]: But right now I'm allowing myself to learn about everything that there is, evolve my
[Guest 1]: own thinking process, which is I think essential for anyone, even when it comes to economics.
[Guest 1]: Same for IR, you have to give yourself some time.
[Guest 1]: It's too soon for me to put myself in a box.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, so right now I don't give myself any labels.
[Guest 1]: And it also allows you to read a little more, you're more open to the other arguments and
[Guest 1]: you can be more objective, which is, I think, what we're all trying to do.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, all these theoretical lenses are obviously sort of useful tools and useful
[Amit Varma]: guides to being able to think about the world and understands people's actions in different
[Amit Varma]: ways.
[Amit Varma]: But what's wrong, do you find they actually correspond with reality?
[Amit Varma]: For example, we can have all kinds of frames of about how, you know, foreign policy proceeds
[Amit Varma]: and how China relates to India and blah, blah, blah.
[Amit Varma]: And then things happen, which don't fit into these frames.
[Amit Varma]: And you're like, Hey, what's going on?
[Amit Varma]: What's happening?
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, and Hamsini, you've actually sort of been in China and I heard you in the
[Amit Varma]: All Things Policy podcast the other day with Manoj, where you made the very interesting
[Amit Varma]: observation that while China is a part of our lives here in India, right down to the
[Amit Varma]: phones we use and all of that, India was not at all a part of your life in China, which
[Amit Varma]: I found fascinating, and which also kind of indicates that, you know, in all these frameworks,
[Amit Varma]: we'll talk about Indochina with a hyphen, as if, you know, these are two characters
[Amit Varma]: equally interested in each other.
[Amit Varma]: But for a lot of Chinese, India is very far away, which is not quite the case for us here.
[Amit Varma]: Can you kind of expand on these two sort of angles?
[Guest 2]: Yeah, also, as an IR scholar, Amit, I will object to you saying Indochina, because Indochina
[Guest 2]: typically refers to Cambodia, Vietnam, Laos.
[Guest 2]: So Sino-Indian is what they generally say, but I agree with your point, in the sense
[Guest 2]: that it's very difficult to fathom how the world around us fits into these theories that
[Guest 2]: were formed since the 1920s, right?
[Guest 2]: And what I try to do, at least with my own understanding of the world, is to, I think
[Guest 2]: in the back of my head, I will understand how, say, liberals look at something or constructivists
[Guest 2]: look at something, and then see if it plays out without prescribing that lens to it, you
[Guest 2]: know, and say, this is what happened.
[Guest 2]: It doesn't particularly matter what a school of thought thinks about it.
[Guest 2]: But what matters is sort of the element that's at play, you know?
[Guest 2]: If this is power, then what does that school of thought tell us about that element, rather
[Guest 2]: than about, you know, large scale sweeping statements about the world?
[Guest 2]: So when I was living in China, for example, there was a lot that we kept talking about.
[Guest 2]: For example, in US and India, you talk a lot about sort of the China threat theory, which
[Guest 2]: is that China's rise is threatening, and it will destabilize the world order, and so on.
[Guest 2]: And in China, they talk about China's peaceful rise, which is the idea that China will peacefully
[Guest 2]: become a superpower.
[Guest 2]: And you have criticisms of both theories on either end.
[Guest 2]: And it's very interesting to see how that plays out and sort of live that reality.
[Guest 2]: There is always a little bit of dissonance, however.
[Guest 2]: What I think for me helps is to use these labels to understand and put a name to what
[Guest 2]: is happening around me, but not fully ascribe to that label alone as my own worldview, if
[Amit Varma]: that makes sense.
[Amit Varma]: That makes a lot of sense.
[Amit Varma]: And it's about time before our listeners rebel and go away to actually talk about India and
[Amit Varma]: China.
[Amit Varma]: I was about to say Indochina.
[Amit Varma]: But yeah, you've corrected me there.
[Amit Varma]: So to talk about sort of India and China, and obviously, you know, before we come to
[Amit Varma]: the current time, which is deeply complicated, and it's almost become a trend of, I mean,
[Amit Varma]: there's actually two simultaneous trends going on nowadays in our discourse.
[Amit Varma]: And one is to disregard history completely and just talk of the current moment and the
[Amit Varma]: other trend is to make up a history and, you know, fit it to whatever ideology you happen
[Amit Varma]: to have.
[Amit Varma]: But we will not fall into any of these traps before we can talk about what is now happening,
[Amit Varma]: we have to get complete historical context.
[Amit Varma]: And we will do it at different kinds of levels.
[Amit Varma]: Level one, which I'd like you guys to talk about, is sort of a centuries old view, which
[Amit Varma]: is how has China traditionally looked at itself?
[Amit Varma]: And you know, India as a political entity, of course, is recent, but in general, in the
[Amit Varma]: subcontinent, how have we looked at ourselves?
[Amit Varma]: What are the sort of different worldviews towards the rest of the world?
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, how has that impacted our relations over the centuries?
[Guest 2]: You know, particularly when we talk about China and India, we come across two different
[Guest 2]: schools of thought, right?
[Guest 2]: And the first in China is tianxia, or, you know, all under the heavens.
[Guest 2]: And, you know, I know it's extremely cliche to now sort of begin talking with tianxia,
[Guest 2]: but you can't escape from it either.
[Guest 2]: And the concept of tianxia essentially is that you have, you know, heaven and underneath
[Guest 2]: heaven, the Middle Kingdom, which is China, and you know, and then you have sort of layers
[Guest 2]: outside it.
[Guest 2]: And first you have the Middle Kingdom itself, then you have countries that have pledged
[Guest 2]: their allegiance, in a sense, to the Middle Kingdom, and outside that you have barbarians.
[Guest 2]: And this sort of worldview is supposed to have informed the way the Chinese approached
[Guest 2]: the world and themselves for a very long time.
[Guest 2]: So there's even a very funny anecdote that the first time that a British envoy goes into
[Guest 2]: the court of the Qianlong Emperor and says, oh, my king sends his regards, the Emperor
[Guest 2]: says, who is your king?
[Guest 2]: There is only one king.
[Guest 2]: So they didn't really recognize the sovereignty of anybody else.
[Guest 2]: And that's very interesting when you consider the Westphalian system, where we traditionally
[Guest 2]: put ourselves where all states are equal.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, that is something that I wanted to point out.
[Amit Varma]: And in the Indian subcontinent, rather, as you know, there wasn't per se in India, then
[Amit Varma]: the approach was very different, right?
[Amit Varma]: It was a very pluralistic kind of approach where you recognize that there are many different
[Amit Varma]: sort of sovereigns, and there are different ways of dealing with this.
[Amit Varma]: But you certainly don't have this arrogance that you'll recognize no other king but yourself.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, that's kind of dictated also by size, you are a lot of chutku-chutkulati
[Amit Varma]: kingdoms.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, that's a brilliant way to talk about India's sort of checkered history, right?
[Guest 2]: Like all these chutku-chutku systems that exist, often making alliances with each other
[Guest 2]: ganging up on bigger kingdoms, each of these kingdoms have their own civil services base,
[Guest 2]: they have their own tax structures.
[Guest 2]: Of course, when you look at like small kingdoms in Rajasthan, for example, they could have
[Guest 2]: all shared similar features.
[Guest 2]: But when you look at it on a macro scale, these were very disparate kingdoms.
[Guest 2]: When India finally got independence, we were 540 odd kingdoms, that princely states that
[Guest 2]: eventually acceded to form the Indian Union.
[Guest 2]: And before the British came, this could have easily been twice, thrice that number.
[Guest 2]: And there's sort of a tradition in Indian strategic thought, to go back to the Arthashastra
[Guest 2]: and Cortellian schools of thought, that look at how alliances were formed, and how they
[Guest 2]: were often directed at enemies, you know, the concept of my enemy's enemy is my friend
[Guest 2]: and so on.
[Guest 2]: But I would not say that you could prescribe this sort of strategic thought to all the
[Amit Varma]: countries in the subcontinent.
[Amit Varma]: To all the countries in the subcontinent is an interesting way of putting it.
[Amit Varma]: And it's interesting that, you know, China, despite this sort of sense of superiority,
[Amit Varma]: were also in a sense, a little bit insular in the sense that they didn't really have
[Amit Varma]: imperial ambitions of taking over the world.
[Amit Varma]: Certainly not when it came to India, for example, where of course, the Himalayas are a natural
[Amit Varma]: barrier.
[Amit Varma]: And I believe before modern times, there was only one conflict sometime in, you know, 600
[Amit Varma]: AD or something, a minor conflict, but otherwise, there was really nothing much.
[Guest 2]: No, Amit, the Chinese history is filled with war.
[Guest 2]: If you look at like, whether it's the Song or the Ming or the Qin.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, towards India, towards India, which is Sino-Indian, Sino-Indian would be slightly
[Guest 2]: different.
[Guest 2]: I think we have to raise a couple of points here.
[Guest 2]: There's this really excellent book that I refer to later as well, called From Frontier
[Guest 2]: Policy to Foreign Policy.
[Guest 2]: And the author, Matthew Mosca, points out that for the most part, the Qing Empire, which
[Guest 2]: was ruling during the 17th and 18th and the 19th centuries, didn't really look at India
[Guest 2]: as a whole.
[Guest 2]: In the sense you had Indian traders at Guangdong, Guangzhou, the ports on the eastern seaboard,
[Guest 2]: and those people were seen as different.
[Guest 2]: You had merchants from Calcutta who were being seen as different.
[Guest 2]: You had people who were in Tibet who were being seen as different.
[Guest 2]: And so for a very long time, the Chinese court had to contend with the fact that these were
[Guest 2]: not localized tribes, but rather one large kingdom, which eventually came under British
[Guest 2]: India and so on.
[Guest 2]: So that was something that was a real feature of Chinese foreign policy at that point in
[Guest 2]: time.
[Guest 2]: And it was difficult because of intelligence gathering, because of the way that courts
[Guest 2]: were structured, the way information was relayed and so on.
[Guest 2]: But they didn't largely have any conflicts towards India.
[Guest 2]: There were always skirmishes along the border that could have been traced, for example,
[Guest 2]: with the emperor and the kingdom in Ladakh or across Tibet and things like that.
[Guest 2]: So those were regular features of the border, but they aren't really considered in Chinese
[Amit Varma]: history.
[Amit Varma]: And is it sort of fair to say that the one time where China begins to loom large in India's
[Amit Varma]: sort of geopolitical considerations is really when the British Empire is underway.
[Amit Varma]: So in the 19th century, you have the great game happening where you have sort of two
[Amit Varma]: imperialistic forces in the British and the Russians vying for influence in territory.
[Amit Varma]: And at that point, you know, the question that the British face is where do we draw
[Amit Varma]: the line?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, we're obviously not going beyond the Himalayas, but where do we draw the line?
[Amit Varma]: Do we keep Afghanistan as a buffer state between Russia and us?
[Amit Varma]: What role, most pertinently, does China play in this?
[Amit Varma]: And China is almost, you know, this insular force whose approach till then to the rest
[Amit Varma]: of the world is, you know, who the hell are you guys?
[Amit Varma]: You are either barbarians or kindly come here to pay tribute.
[Amit Varma]: But at this point, you know, they are not up against, you know, India as it will be
[Amit Varma]: later or against a whole bunch of disparate nation states, but against the British Empire.
[Amit Varma]: And this is when the first sort of disagreements about borders start to take shape.
[Guest 2]: So tell me a little bit about that period.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, I think you raised a very important point, Amit, in that the British wanted a
[Guest 2]: buffer zone.
[Guest 2]: And a lot of this does go back to sort of this great game of the 1800s.
[Guest 2]: And the British were particularly concerned when Russia conquered Tashkent and Samarkand,
[Guest 2]: which are currently sort of Uzbekistan.
[Guest 2]: And the British were really afraid that Russia would come all the way to the borders of India.
[Guest 2]: And so they wanted not only a frontier, which at that point in time was Afghanistan and
[Guest 2]: the Himalayas, but they wanted a border, which was a line in that sense.
[Guest 2]: There's often, whenever we talk about the border with China, a lot of scholars do point
[Guest 2]: out that it's very difficult to parse through the Chinese sources on the Indian border,
[Guest 2]: because there's A, very little that's been written about, and B, it's very, very disparate,
[Guest 2]: as I'd mentioned a couple of minutes ago.
[Guest 2]: So I think, you know, when it comes to this, you have to go back to Ladakh at that point
[Guest 2]: in time.
[Guest 2]: And I'm sure you've spoken about this with other guests on your show whenever you're
[Guest 2]: talking to Kashmir.
[Guest 2]: But all of this history of even Jammu and Kashmir, right, at the end of the first Anglo-Sikh
[Guest 2]: war, you have the Treaty of Amritsar that's signed.
[Guest 2]: And then Gulab Singh took over as sort of the Dogra Maharaja of Jammu and Kashmir.
[Guest 2]: And so the Dogras, the people who start pushing the frontiers of Jammu and Kashmir, they are
[Guest 2]: the ones who subsumed Ladakh, which was an independent kingdom for the most part of history.
[Guest 2]: And it was independent the way Tibet was, the way Bhutan was, the way Nepal and Sikkim
[Guest 2]: were.
[Guest 2]: And so Gulab Singh and the Sikhs eventually also capture Gilgit-Baltistan, which is now
[Guest 2]: a part of POK, and the Hunza region, and so on and so forth.
[Guest 2]: But what happens here is that you have all of these British geographers and explorers
[Guest 2]: and diplomats who go in during the 19th century, and they start exploring the Himalayas, right,
[Guest 2]: the Royal Geographic Society is an organization that's now looking at how explorers will see
[Guest 2]: the world and look at unknown places and things like that.
[Guest 2]: So I think this is the period when maps are finally starting to be drawn.
[Guest 2]: And the first map that comes up is something called the Ada-Johnson line.
[Guest 2]: And what essentially happens is William Johnson, who was a British surveyor, becomes Gulab
[Guest 2]: Singh's governor for Ladakh.
[Guest 2]: And he proposed a line that would go through Aksai Chin, which we know now as very infamous.
[Guest 2]: And it goes all the way to the Kunlun range, which is a little further back.
[Guest 2]: And the Johnson line was presented in London by a man called Sir John Ada.
[Guest 2]: And that's why it's called the Ada-Johnson line.
[Guest 2]: This was proposed in 1865, but the Chinese never really recognized it.
[Guest 2]: So the next line that comes up about 20 years later, is that the British again, are in talks
[Guest 2]: with the Chinese and they propose another line.
[Guest 2]: And this is called the McCartney-McDonnell line.
[Guest 2]: And it's very famous because McDonnell is also the person who secured the 99-year lease
[Guest 2]: for Hong Kong.
[Guest 2]: And so he proposes a line that will put Aksai Chin directly under the Chinese rule.
[Guest 2]: So these are two lines that are proposed much before the 1912 similar agreement, which we
[Guest 2]: can talk about.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, so they proposed, but how did the Chinese react to that?
[Amit Varma]: Like, is this a unilateral thing that the British are proposing that these are the lines
[Amit Varma]: that they're declaring it?
[Amit Varma]: Is there pushback from the Chinese?
[Amit Varma]: What do the Chinese feel about all this?
[Guest 2]: What's the sort of politics happening there?
[Guest 2]: So the British present these lines.
[Guest 2]: So they get these surveyors to draw up these lines.
[Guest 2]: They present it to the Chinese court, they present it to the Tibetans as well.
[Guest 2]: And you have various interpretations of how this was perceived.
[Guest 2]: The Chinese, to date, staunchly argue that they have never accepted any of these lines.
[Guest 2]: And there is a certain amount of truth in that, in that even if there were conversations
[Guest 2]: or discussions, you see Chinese diplomats at that point in time, or the Qing court just
[Guest 2]: rejecting these maps and the talks finally falling through.
[Amit Varma]: Right, and then in 1914, there's another sort of interesting border discussion that, you
[Amit Varma]: know, has resonance up to the current day, which is supposedly a three-way agreement
[Amit Varma]: between India, China, and Tibet, which leads to what we call the Mek-Mohan line.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about that, because that's also interesting in the court dispute there
[Amit Varma]: was even a little funny to me for reasons I'll get into, but yeah.
[Guest 2]: Okay, so I know that, you know, we come up with the Mek-Mohan line in 1914, but what's
[Guest 2]: important to remember is that we come up with the Mek-Mohan line after nine months of deliberations.
[Amit Varma]: So the-
[Amit Varma]: By we, you mean the British, you're referring to we as a British.
[Guest 2]: By we, I mean the British, the Chinese, and the Tibetans, right?
[Guest 2]: So all three of us hold deliberations for about nine months about where a border should
[Guest 2]: be.
[Guest 2]: And what's interesting is that they finally agreed on sort of an inner Tibet, which would
[Guest 2]: be made up of regions of Amdo and Kham, and outer Tibet, which is sort of made up of adjoining
[Guest 2]: areas within China, which would typically be in areas of Sichuan and Yunnan right now.
[Guest 2]: And the British finally agreed that Tibet was sort of under the sovereignty of the Chinese,
[Guest 2]: but they also put down stipulations that the Chinese would not interfere with the running
[Guest 2]: of Tibet or they would agree never to annex it and so on.
[Guest 2]: So with the Chinese, the main deliberations were on what would be the boundary between
[Guest 2]: inner Tibet and outer Tibet.
[Guest 2]: And with the Tibetans, the British drew up the borders of Tibet.
[Guest 2]: And this is what Indians now call the Mek-Mohan line, which is now disputed.
[Guest 2]: So that is one part of it.
[Guest 2]: Now I think what is important to mention here is that the Chinese argument is that the Chinese
[Guest 2]: representatives at this meeting were kept in the dark.
[Guest 2]: They said that, you know, these British imperialists pressured the Tibetans into accepting a new
[Guest 2]: border and that all of this was a conspiracy.
[Guest 2]: And their biggest rejection of the line comes in because their negotiator, this man called
[Guest 2]: Chen Yifan, just initiated some pages of the agreement.
[Guest 2]: He never really ratified it.
[Guest 2]: And so that's why the Chinese argue that the Mek-Mohan line is not valid.
[Amit Varma]: And for all future diplomats, kindly note the difference between initialing and ratifying.
[Amit Varma]: Do not make this mistake.
[Amit Varma]: No, it's a very interesting argument because it's like the Chinese weren't too interested
[Amit Varma]: at that time in the border between Tibet and British India.
[Amit Varma]: And so, you know, the Tibet and British India agree on a border.
[Amit Varma]: And later China takes over Tibet and suddenly the border between China and British India.
[Amit Varma]: And then, of course, there are all these disputes over, you know, I mean, Tawang is famously
[Amit Varma]: kind of part of that dispute.
[Amit Varma]: Let me turn to you, Shabani, now as we approach independence and we even reach independence.
[Amit Varma]: And but before we sort of talk about the post-independence imperatives, one sort of broader question
[Amit Varma]: I have is that, you know, when one thinks about all these kinds of border disputes and
[Amit Varma]: many of these disputes are over areas which are uninhabited, like Saichen is the area
[Amit Varma]: of Switzerland, but it's not quite the most bustling place.
[Amit Varma]: And these disputes are things that we are stuck with, even though, you know, if you
[Amit Varma]: were to approach it with a tabula rasa, it's quite possible that, you know, neither country
[Amit Varma]: would really dispute in the first place.
[Amit Varma]: But it's a historical artifact, it's been something that's fought over.
[Amit Varma]: And then, you know, that kind of comes down over time and it almost becomes therefore
[Amit Varma]: a matter of sticking to the previous stance you've made, not just personal ego, but even
[Amit Varma]: national pride.
[Amit Varma]: Like there's a wonderful quote by Jawaharlal Nehru, which I'll take this opportunity to
[Amit Varma]: read out, which he said on September 4th, 1959, I don't quote him much, but here we
[Amit Varma]: go.
[Amit Varma]: This seem pertinent quote.
[Amit Varma]: Now, it is a question of fact, whether this village or that village or this little strip
[Amit Varma]: of territory is on their side or on our side.
[Amit Varma]: Normally, wherever there are relatively petty disputes, well, it does seem rather absurd
[Amit Varma]: for two great countries immediately to rush at each other's throats to decide whether
[Amit Varma]: two miles of territory are on this side or on that side, and especially two miles of
[Amit Varma]: territory in the high mountains where nobody lives, but where national prestige and dignity
[Amit Varma]: is involved.
[Amit Varma]: It is not the two miles of territory.
[Amit Varma]: It is a nation's dignity and self-respect that becomes involved.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore this happens, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, we could argue that he could have been much crisper there, but it's a speech
[Amit Varma]: and not a piece of writing.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, in all this talk of this and that, but it seems to me that, you know, in
[Amit Varma]: these areas that we are fighting about, it's almost ironic that these countries and the
[Amit Varma]: leaders of these countries don't seem to care too much per se for these areas, but these
[Amit Varma]: are historical disputes.
[Amit Varma]: And because you disagree, you kind of keep disagreeing like, you know, Srinath Raghavan
[Amit Varma]: in his book, War and Peace in Modern India, in fact, writes about how, you know, Nehru
[Amit Varma]: at first didn't really think that India had a legit claim to Aksai Chin.
[Amit Varma]: His whole game was that, let's use it as a bargaining chip and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But, you know, by the time we get to Chu Enlai's famous sort of offer to India in 1960, which
[Amit Varma]: Shibani will enlighten us about soon, you know, Nehru has been convinced that, no, we
[Amit Varma]: should claim Aksai Chin and not let it go.
[Amit Varma]: And some could say that, you know, all our future conflicts could have been avoided had
[Amit Varma]: we just been pragmatic about that.
[Guest 1]: So Shibani, what do you feel about all of this?
[Guest 1]: I think the quote that you read from Nehru says a lot about his personality.
[Guest 1]: And the reason I bring in personality is because the way I understand international relations,
[Guest 1]: if you look at it as a board game, while the moves that the players make are important,
[Guest 1]: it's also important to understand who's making the move.
[Guest 1]: And that's why the study of personalities, the context in which certain decisions were
[Guest 1]: taken, and what were the constraints that the leadership had, are equally important.
[Guest 1]: While your scholarly sort of debate and discussion should be about the policy decision itself,
[Guest 1]: you can't overlook the circumstances in which they were made.
[Guest 1]: And so while we're talking about Nehru, Nehru comes to power much like when Mao Zedong is
[Guest 1]: also gaining prominence, and we have People's Republic of China established when the Cold
[Guest 1]: War is going on.
[Guest 1]: So both of these people inherit an international system that's based on great power politics
[Guest 1]: between the US and the Soviet Union.
[Guest 1]: And it's very easy to think that leaders would just adapt to the international system that
[Guest 1]: they inherit, and because they are restricted by it.
[Guest 1]: But both of these people are similar in the way that they sort of assert themselves and
[Guest 1]: challenge the system that they inherit.
[Guest 1]: With Nehru, he knew that non-alignment was, you know, one of the key policy decisions
[Guest 1]: that he made.
[Guest 1]: He was assertive, but in a more diplomatic way.
[Guest 1]: When you compare it to Mao, Mao viewed it as, you know, the need to be military, like
[Guest 1]: have more military power and be assertive in that sense.
[Guest 1]: And that's why he also sort of inflamed the conflicts in Korea, in Vietnam, and what Hamsini
[Guest 1]: was talking about along the Sino-Soviet border as well.
[Guest 1]: So that's where they sort of contrast.
[Guest 1]: Nehru was, you know, thinking about self-restraint and vigorous diplomacy, and Mao's focus was
[Guest 1]: on being military, you know, exercising military might.
[Guest 1]: Going back to like history and ego of people, I think when we talk about Nehru, you have
[Guest 1]: to, at the end of the day, he wanted to be prime minister, like when he woke up the next
[Guest 1]: day.
[Guest 1]: So the decisions that were made were based on the political capital that he had.
[Guest 1]: And if he could not convince the Indian public of a certain decision that he made, he would
[Guest 1]: not go ahead with it, which is what happens later when Chuan Lai proposes the compromise.
[Guest 1]: And I forget what your question is.
[Amit Varma]: How much of these disputes are sort of just a historical artifact, and then the individuals
[Amit Varma]: concerned, whether it's, you know, Nehru in this case, get trapped by circumstances into
[Amit Varma]: fighting for something which both they don't necessarily care about themselves, and are
[Amit Varma]: also not really of such strategic significance in that sense.
[Amit Varma]: Like, you know, Srinath in his book talks about how Nehru's approach changed from, you
[Amit Varma]: know, viewing Aksai Chen as a bargaining chip to something that is inherently part of India.
[Amit Varma]: And as you correctly said, I will quote Nehru again, using the them and that formulation,
[Amit Varma]: where Nehru at one point said, quote, if I give them that, I shall no longer be prime
[Amit Varma]: minister of India.
[Amit Varma]: I will not do it.
[Amit Varma]: And by them, he means Chinese and by that he means Aksai Chen.
[Amit Varma]: So if I give the Chinese Aksai Chen, I shall no longer be prime minister, but that's something
[Amit Varma]: we'll come to later.
[Amit Varma]: Well, the larger question I sort of had is that how much of these almost, like to me,
[Amit Varma]: at least from my layman's perspective, a lot of these disputes seems so tragic to me, because
[Amit Varma]: it almost seems like that there is some historical dispute somewhere over reasons that no longer
[Amit Varma]: apply.
[Amit Varma]: And then you get trapped in a chain of events and eventually millions of people die.
[Amit Varma]: And it's just a natural way it flows out.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, Hamsini?
[Guest 2]: Sorry, I just wanted to add to what Shabani was saying.
[Guest 2]: And I think it's important to remember that the Cold War was taking off.
[Guest 2]: But it's also important to remember that both Nehru and Mao were at the heads of these new
[Guest 2]: volatile states that were large and that everyone expected to fail, right?
[Guest 2]: So you had these extremely large, poor, populous states that were formed.
[Guest 2]: And neither of their borders were what they are today.
[Guest 2]: At that point in time, your borders were lines in a map.
[Guest 2]: They weren't even fortified with wires or anything.
[Guest 2]: And I think that's why it was important.
[Guest 2]: India went through the experience of partition, which Nehru, I think, personally also experienced
[Guest 2]: because of where his home was and so on, and him having sort of the cultural identity of
[Guest 2]: being a Kashmiri Pandit.
[Guest 2]: And I think, therefore, even if he didn't care personally about two kilometers of barren
[Guest 2]: land, it's about what that symbolized, particularly when you have a belligerent Pakistan on one
[Guest 2]: side, when you have treasures erupting, when you still have the union not officially formed.
[Guest 2]: And I think, on the other hand, it's very important to remember that China was going
[Guest 2]: through the exact same experience of consolidating all of its borders.
[Guest 2]: At that point in time, Tibet was still autonomous.
[Guest 2]: Hong Kong was under the British.
[Guest 2]: Macau was under the Portuguese.
[Guest 2]: Inner Mongolia was still officially not a part of the People's Republic.
[Guest 2]: Xinjiang was very disputed.
[Guest 2]: None of the borders that China had in the 1940s were absolute.
[Guest 2]: And for China, I think it also felt that it bordered the Soviet Union, which was, I think,
[Guest 2]: about 4,300 kilometers of land.
[Guest 2]: And their relationship, though, was heavily influencing the Communist Party, did turn
[Guest 2]: sour at one point in time.
[Guest 2]: So that threat was present.
[Guest 2]: And the Chinese were also afraid that India was sort of being forced by these imperialists
[Guest 2]: because India also had an imperialist history to sort of do what the U.S. wanted and to
[Guest 2]: do what the imperialists wanted.
[Guest 2]: So I don't think it's merely about having these small historical disputes that no one
[Guest 2]: cared about.
[Guest 2]: I think if you go back to the 1940s, this is everything, because if you give up on this
[Guest 2]: land, then it's sort of you giving up on your idea of India, which is two years old.
[Guest 2]: And you don't have nationalisms like you do now.
[Guest 2]: You have a lot more at stake by giving up these two kilometers of land, is what I think.
[Amit Varma]: That's very insightful.
[Amit Varma]: And sort of a couple of thoughts came to my mind while you were going through that.
[Amit Varma]: And one is that it's interesting that while, you know, both Mao and Nehru were in charge
[Amit Varma]: of relatively sort of new regimes or new nations as they were then, they came to power very
[Amit Varma]: differently where, you know, Nehru kind of came to power through, you know, classic Congress
[Amit Varma]: moderation, statesmanship, diplomacy, and blah, blah, blah.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, those values also come into play when he's actually prime minister.
[Amit Varma]: And similarly, Mao is the quintessential guerrilla warfare guy.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, to some extent, that probably influences him.
[Amit Varma]: So just looking at sort of, it's not only that these individuals were impacted by the
[Amit Varma]: way they came to power.
[Amit Varma]: But given that these were the paths to power, it was almost inevitable that the individuals
[Amit Varma]: who eventually emerged on top would be individuals like Nehru and Mao, respectively.
[Amit Varma]: The other thought that strikes me is that despite all the rhetoric about, you know,
[Amit Varma]: non-alignment, and we just want to live peacefully with everybody and all of that, the bottom
[Amit Varma]: line is that the Indian Union coming together after the British left could also be described
[Amit Varma]: as a profound act of imperialism, because you have one central government sort of taking
[Amit Varma]: over these hundreds of princely states, sometimes with, you know, cunningly cajoling them and
[Amit Varma]: breaking promises later, as we know happened, and sometimes with the threat of force and
[Amit Varma]: sometimes with force itself.
[Amit Varma]: So to after that typical scene unseen digression, we shall now get back to Shibani and to take
[Amit Varma]: us through the 50s, like obviously, the whole takeover of Tibet happens around 1950.
[Amit Varma]: But also take us through what is Nehru's approach to foreign policy, what is Mao's approach
[Amit Varma]: to foreign policy?
[Amit Varma]: How do they look at each other?
[Amit Varma]: You know, where does Patel differ with Nehru, for example?
[Amit Varma]: And you know, what is Chu and Lai's role in all this?
[Amit Varma]: Give me a sense of that background.
[Guest 1]: So if you look at like, there's a digital archive, which has, you know, a lot of these
[Guest 1]: conversations between the Indian leadership and the Chinese leadership recorded that anyone
[Guest 1]: can access.
[Guest 1]: And if you look at the minutes of Chairman Mao's first meeting with Nehru, which happens
[Guest 1]: in October 1954, they're talking about Sino-Indian relations, they're talking about the political
[Guest 1]: situation in Asia, both countries acknowledge that they have suffered from oppression, and
[Guest 1]: that going forward, both of them need to play an important role in Asia, because they are
[Guest 1]: the biggest nation states in the region.
[Guest 1]: There is an understanding that they will both pursue rapid development, they're both like
[Guest 1]: agricultural societies that want to industrialize quickly, and that this, you know, chase for
[Guest 1]: development should not frighten the other so called smaller states in Asia, which is
[Guest 1]: why you have the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence, or the Punch Shield, which was
[Guest 1]: actually incidentally signed in the same year earlier that time.
[Guest 1]: So there is an agreement in terms of what needs to be done in the region between the
[Guest 1]: two.
[Guest 1]: But there is also mistrust, Mao viewed Nehru as this Western educated leader who could
[Guest 1]: not be fully trusted, because Mao felt that Nehru would lean towards Western ideologies
[Guest 1]: and you know, would have a soft corner for the institutions that he himself did not believe
[Guest 1]: in and wanted to challenge.
[Guest 1]: On the other hand, there are declassified CIA files that say that Nehru was not sure
[Guest 1]: of Chu Enlai and his sort of intentions, and he's quoted saying that he has cheated me
[Guest 1]: multiple times, so no matter how many times we have discussions on the border, I'm not
[Guest 1]: sure I can believe him.
[Guest 1]: So there is that mistrust that we talk about between India and China even today, that exists,
[Amit Varma]: you know, from the 50s.
[Amit Varma]: And how does sort of the Chinese takeover of Tibet play into that when it happens in
[Amit Varma]: 1950?
[Amit Varma]: Like, you know, Nehru is almost inclined, it seems at that time to sort of not take
[Amit Varma]: an aggressive note and give them the benefit of the doubt, while, you know, Vallabhbhai
[Amit Varma]: Patel, you know, famously in a note to Nehru said that, you know, this throws, quote, into
[Amit Varma]: the melting pot, all frontier and commercial settlement, stop quote, you know, I mean,
[Amit Varma]: he kind of saw it, he described the northeastern frontier as one with, quote, unlimited scope
[Amit Varma]: for infiltration, stop quote, and also added, and that might be true to the current day
[Amit Varma]: for good reason, that quote, the people inhabiting those oceans have no established loyalty to
[Amit Varma]: India, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: But leaving aside what Patel kind of feels about it, you know, what does the takeover
[Amit Varma]: of Tibet kind of shake the relationships and how do they then, you know, those border disputes
[Amit Varma]: are still sort of being discussed, how does all of that proceed for the rest of that decade
[Amit Varma]: up to 1959?
[Amit Varma]: When, of course, it all blows up.
[Guest 1]: So I have a very brief point to make here and then Hamsini can take over.
[Guest 1]: But with respect to Tibet, I think China felt that India was interfering within its sovereign
[Guest 1]: territory.
[Guest 1]: And that was not acceptable.
[Guest 1]: Whereas India didn't view it that way.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, I think what Shivani has pointed out is very important.
[Guest 2]: You know, the way I think about the 1950s often is that, you know, we sort of celebrated
[Guest 2]: with, you know, the non-alignment movement and Panjshir and everything that Shivani talked
[Guest 2]: about.
[Guest 2]: And there was this real sense of feeling that here are these two countries that are very
[Guest 2]: similar and facing challenges and could possibly lead the third world, right?
[Guest 2]: And something that I came across in some of my readings recently is statistical exchanges
[Guest 2]: between India and China, for example.
[Guest 2]: The Chinese rejected a lot of statistics as a discipline that took place.
[Guest 2]: And they said that there was a need for socialist statistics to come about and things like that.
[Guest 2]: It's very, very fascinating.
[Guest 2]: Arnab Ghosh has a book called Making It Count.
[Guest 2]: And I had a podcast episode with him recently.
[Guest 2]: And he was talking about how during the 1950s, you even had some Chinese statisticians come
[Guest 2]: over and train with PC Mahalnobis.
[Guest 2]: And PC Mahalnobis was invited by Zhou Enlai to go to China and deliver lectures.
[Guest 2]: And that was something that you didn't really see particularly at that period of time, these
[Guest 2]: exchanges that are happening very under the radar, that are very technical, but still
[Guest 2]: count rather than these big picture things that we think of otherwise.
[Guest 2]: Moving on to Tibet, and I think Shabani raised again a very, very pertinent point, which
[Guest 2]: is that the Chinese saw it as interference within their internal affairs, whereas the
[Guest 2]: Indians perceived it differently.
[Guest 2]: And the Indians perceived it differently because even the 13th Dalai Lama, the Dalai Lama before
[Guest 2]: the present one, had served out a period of his exile in India.
[Guest 2]: And so there was a lot of exchanges that were happening between the Tibetans and the Indians.
[Guest 2]: And Nehru had met the 14th Dalai Lama in Beijing, and the 14th Dalai Lama, I think, had come
[Guest 2]: down for Buddha Jayanti celebrations or something like that a year before he fled.
[Guest 2]: And so the takeover of Tibet was something that was seen as a natural part of Chinese
[Guest 2]: history and it still continued to be seen in that manner.
[Guest 2]: But this was definitely sort of a pivotal point in the relationship because China was
[Guest 2]: convinced of India's role in aiding Tibetan rebels in that there were covert CIA operations
[Guest 2]: that were happening in Sikkim and all of this was part of the giant imperialist plot.
[Guest 2]: And I think this also may have hardened the Chinese stance on the border.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, let's kind of get to the subject which Indians like to avoid, unless they are
[Amit Varma]: Indians who don't like Nehru, in which case they keep coming back to it.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, leading up to sort of the 1962 war and before that, you have things kind
[Amit Varma]: of beginning to fall apart in 1959 and 1959 seems to me in some ways to almost be similar
[Amit Varma]: to modern times where, you know, there almost seems to be this naive expectation from the
[Amit Varma]: Indian side that, oh, you know, nothing will really happen at the border and it's cool
[Amit Varma]: and we're all chill.
[Amit Varma]: And then suddenly there are these attacks and Indian soldiers die and it's like what's
[Amit Varma]: going on.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, take me through sort of what are the issues there?
[Amit Varma]: Why do those skirmishes happen?
[Amit Varma]: You know, how are the Indians looking at China at that point in time?
[Amit Varma]: And the Chinese, as you guys mentioned, obviously are suspicious because they are just worried
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, India will continue the imperialism of their predecessor colonial power, so to
[Guest 2]: say.
[Guest 2]: Yeah.
[Guest 2]: So I can get into what happened.
[Guest 2]: And I think before you dive into 1959, Amit, I think it's important to go to 1957.
[Guest 2]: And what happens in 1957 is that China constructs a highway from Xinjiang to Tibet, all the
[Guest 2]: way to Lhasa.
[Guest 2]: And this cuts across Aksai Chin.
[Guest 2]: And this really surprised the Indians because they hadn't imagined that a project like this
[Guest 2]: could have taken place.
[Guest 2]: At that point in time, the highway was still sort of cavel stones, right?
[Guest 2]: It's not a six-way lane in which we imagine highways today.
[Guest 2]: But this was still a road through a boundary that the Indians considered disputed.
[Guest 2]: And therefore, this also steered the Indian stance on taking a harsher line to the border.
[Guest 2]: And so you have two clashes in 1959, one in what we used to call the Northeast frontier
[Guest 2]: region, the Arunachal Pradesh, Arnefa, and one in Ladakh, which is still disputed.
[Guest 2]: And so what happens with the fallout of these two clashes is that China offered that both
[Guest 2]: countries fall back by 20 kilometers in Ladakh, and they don't violate the Makmohan line in
[Guest 1]: the East.
[Guest 1]: So, yeah, talking about what Hamsini said, that, you know, the conflict that led to the
[Guest 1]: 1962 war started in the fifties, and I would go even further back to say that it started
[Guest 1]: in 1954.
[Guest 1]: This is when India published new maps that included Aksai Chin within the boundaries
[Guest 1]: of India.
[Guest 1]: And when it discovered the highway, Nehru sort of, you know, called up Chou Enlai and
[Guest 1]: said, what's going on?
[Guest 1]: And Chou sort of reassured him multiple times that, you know, there was an error and that
[Guest 1]: the maps needed, like, revising.
[Guest 1]: There wasn't actually any sort of crossing of the line, so to say.
[Guest 1]: And there were multiple conversations around this, which also led to an increase in suspicion
[Guest 1]: towards China that Nehru felt.
[Guest 1]: This is also evident in the fact that, in how Nehru sort of tackled China within his
[Guest 1]: office.
[Guest 1]: So, G. Parthasarathy, who was the Indian envoy to China at the time, was asked to bypass
[Guest 1]: the defense minister, who was Mr. Menon at the time, and bring in all communications
[Guest 1]: related to China directly to Nehru.
[Guest 1]: Again, Nehru, I would sort of call this, you know, fog in foreign policy.
[Guest 1]: Fog is actually a strategic studies term where you talk about the uncertainty on the battlefield
[Guest 1]: in times of war, but you also see it happening in foreign policy, where the leadership is
[Guest 1]: unsure about what the other side is doing, there's information asymmetry, and you're
[Guest 1]: not sure who you can trust.
[Guest 1]: The same way Nehru was not sure that the defense minister could be trusted because of his leanings
[Guest 1]: towards the left, and he felt that he would be sympathetic to the Chinese, so he should
[Guest 1]: be bypassed.
[Guest 1]: And that sort of brings us to what Hamsini was saying, where the highway was discovered.
[Guest 1]: And in 1960, Chou En-lai proposed that India drop the claim to Aksai Chin.
[Guest 1]: And if India were to do that, China would, you know, withdraw its claim from the Northeast
[Guest 1]: Frontier Agency.
[Guest 1]: This was not a subtle move on the part of the Chinese, and, you know, Chou consistently
[Guest 1]: refused to accept the legitimacy of India's territorial claims.
[Guest 1]: So it was, I think, a very frustrating round of negotiations between India and China that
[Guest 1]: I think Chou tried so many times that within 1960, he visited India four times.
[Guest 1]: And the meetings, if you read the transcripts, they go on for hours.
[Guest 1]: So it was an increasingly frustrating process, and neither side was willing to sort of back
[Guest 1]: down on its claim.
[Guest 1]: In hindsight, a lot of people argue that Nehru should have taken the deal, and all future
[Guest 1]: conflict could have been avoided, 1962 could have definitely been avoided.
[Guest 1]: But I would say, like, in my understanding of international relations, there are no guarantees.
[Guest 1]: We cannot say that had India taken that deal or made that compromise at that time, we would
[Guest 1]: not be sitting here recording this podcast discussing the exact same things that we are
[Guest 1]: today.
[Guest 1]: So yeah, I mean, you will always be blamed for things that you didn't do.
[Guest 1]: Nehru did not have the political capital at the time to justify taking on the deal.
[Guest 1]: And like I said before, if you are a leader, you want to wake up and still be the leader
[Guest 1]: of the country.
[Guest 1]: So that is a big consideration for any decision that you make.
[Amit Varma]: No, and I'm very pleased at the implication that the recording of this episode is not
[Amit Varma]: contingent on random historical events.
[Amit Varma]: You know, you're talking about, I have a quote from Chauhan Lai where he visited India in
[Amit Varma]: April 1960.
[Amit Varma]: This was his April trip.
[Amit Varma]: As you said, he came a number of times that year, where he says, quote, I have come here
[Amit Varma]: to seek a solution and not to repeat arguments, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: So you get a sense of what is going on through his head.
[Amit Varma]: And earlier, one of you mentioned that Nehru didn't like him because he was like, this
[Amit Varma]: guy is always cheating me.
[Amit Varma]: So this is sort of the mutual distrust that is going on.
[Amit Varma]: And also at this time, sort of what the Indians do is they have a strategy which is called,
[Amit Varma]: I think, the forward strategy or the forward policy where, you know, the approach is that
[Amit Varma]: whatever is disputed territory, you don't cross that.
[Amit Varma]: But you set up Indian outposts over there aggressively so that the Chinese don't come
[Amit Varma]: over.
[Amit Varma]: And India apparently did that in, I think, up to 60, if I remember correctly, 60 outposts
[Amit Varma]: of this sort.
[Amit Varma]: And the Chinese viewed it as almost an act of war.
[Amit Varma]: It's like, you know, they are creeping closer and closer.
[Amit Varma]: And all these areas on either side of whatever those de facto borders are, were sort of unoccupied.
[Amit Varma]: And why are they setting up so many posts?
[Amit Varma]: And that was kind of what sparked the whole thing off and what sort of interests me.
[Amit Varma]: And this is also sort of a subject that is pertinent today and is going to be wherever
[Amit Varma]: there is politics.
[Amit Varma]: This will be pertinent.
[Amit Varma]: These are the incentives of politicians, whereas, you know, we've earlier discussed how Nehru
[Amit Varma]: said that, look, I want to wake up tomorrow morning as prime minister.
[Amit Varma]: And it is, you know, not going to be possible if I give away Aksai Chen.
[Amit Varma]: And there are stories about how, you know, within the Congress, he was under pressure
[Amit Varma]: to do something and to ramp up the sort of the aggression.
[Amit Varma]: How much, in your view, does politics drive all of this?
[Amit Varma]: And to me, it's, you know, when I look at the incentives of politicians, it's very sort
[Amit Varma]: of much easier to understand what the incentives of politicians in India are like Nehru then
[Amit Varma]: or Modi today, that you cannot be seen to back down beyond the point, which is possibly,
[Amit Varma]: you know, why Chou Enlai could have understood that and framed the whole thing differently
[Amit Varma]: so that Nehru could have had a face saving way out.
[Amit Varma]: And we would still be recording this episode, but he could have had a face saving way out.
[Amit Varma]: But I'm sort of a little baffled by what are the incentives on the Chinese side, like what
[Amit Varma]: are Chou's incentives, what are Mao's incentives, you know, and today and a question we'll come
[Amit Varma]: to much later also in the episode is what are Xi's incentives today, for example, what
[Amit Varma]: were Hu's incentives in the early 2000s, where he was, you know, far friendlier.
[Amit Varma]: So can you guys shed some light on that?
[Amit Varma]: What constituencies are they playing to and what is driving them?
[Guest 2]: So I think there's, it's very important to look at China in the 1960s, right?
[Guest 2]: This is right after Mao started his great leap forward, steel is being melted around
[Guest 2]: the country so that it can be poured into industries.
[Guest 2]: And that's what's happening domestically.
[Guest 2]: But this is also the time when there's something called the Ita incident that happens in Xinjiang,
[Guest 2]: where about 60,000 Kazakhs suddenly flee from Xinjiang.
[Guest 2]: And so the Chinese realized that they really need to start putting up definite boundaries.
[Guest 2]: So the 1960s are a period when China had boundary issues with countries all over, right?
[Guest 2]: But it managed to, at this period of time, 1960 to 1963, 65, settle its boundaries with
[Guest 2]: Pakistan, settle its boundaries with Myanmar.
[Guest 2]: And that's very interesting for me, because when you look at why would China resolve its
[Guest 2]: boundaries with Pakistan and Myanmar, but not with India.
[Guest 2]: And there's this book by M. Taylor Francis called Strong Borders, Secure Nation.
[Guest 2]: And it's really fascinating, because what it suggests is that rather than simplifying
[Guest 2]: it as whenever China has been in internal strife, it seeks to be more aggressive on
[Guest 2]: the outside, is something that we hear even today.
[Guest 2]: You know, China is going through this COVID pandemic, needs to deflect, and therefore
[Guest 2]: it's being more aggressive.
[Guest 2]: But I think what the book argues, and what I think makes a lot of sense, is that whenever
[Guest 2]: China has faced internal crises, whether it is Tibet or Taiwan or Xinjiang, it's been
[Guest 2]: more open to compromise and cooperation, whereas if it's had external threats or crises, it's
[Guest 2]: been more prone to aggression.
[Guest 2]: So how this would play out in the India-Pakistan scenario, for example, is that China was going
[Guest 2]: through the crises in Tibet, it was going through a crisis in Xinjiang, and of course
[Guest 2]: facing off with Taiwan, apart from the Great Leap Forward, which is ongoing.
[Guest 2]: So this is a period of internal strife.
[Guest 2]: And therefore, they did not want to have to deal with border wars, with the Pakistan border,
[Guest 2]: for example.
[Guest 2]: Pakistan was supposed to have reached out to China during this period of time in the
[Guest 2]: 1960s, and the Chinese didn't get back to them.
[Guest 2]: But as soon as the month-long border war happens with India, they immediately resolve their
[Guest 2]: border differences with Pakistan and with Myanmar.
[Guest 2]: And that's what's interesting for me, because it's not internal crises that's led them to
[Guest 2]: resolve those boundaries, it's sort of the aggression with India.
[Guest 2]: So you can ask, hey, then why did we fight the boundary war with China?
[Guest 2]: Why didn't Pakistan or Myanmar fight it?
[Guest 2]: And the answer there could be in the forward policy that you'd mentioned, Amit.
[Guest 2]: It could be that Mao had perceived this policy as external aggression, coupled with whatever
[Guest 2]: was happening in Tibet, and therefore construing all of this as sort of expansionism that needed
[Guest 2]: to be taught a lesson.
[Guest 2]: That's a quote that's often come, right, India needs to be taught a lesson, is something
[Guest 2]: that Mao supposedly said.
[Guest 2]: And that's seen very clearly in what happened in terms of politics between Mao and Nehru.
[Guest 1]: Just to add a bit of trivia for politics between Mao and Nehru, I read that Mao had actually
[Guest 1]: told Nehru that he would like to discuss with him war as a policy instrument, and what were
[Guest 1]: Nehru's thoughts on it, if war became the instrument of statecraft.
[Guest 1]: And this is happening in the backdrop of Tibet and India and China discussing how they need
[Guest 1]: to be responsible Asian powers.
[Guest 1]: So yeah, that is an interesting bit of detail I wanted to add.
[Guest 2]: I think the other important thing, and this is something that Bertil Lintner says, is
[Guest 2]: that it could have sort of been a strategy, whereas, you know, for example, Mao had his
[Guest 2]: disdain for Nehru and this idea of teaching India a lesson, whereas Zhou Enlai was entrusted
[Guest 2]: with keeping India guessing about China's actual intentions, you know.
[Guest 2]: And I think what scholars have said at various points with Zhou is that he genuinely attempted
[Guest 2]: to, you know, impress on Nehru that India should meet China halfway.
[Guest 2]: And what's evident with the other countries is that they sort of signaled a willingness
[Guest 2]: to meet China halfway.
[Guest 2]: And with the Pakistan border, if you look at it, China actually granted them some extra
[Guest 2]: territory and took very little in return.
[Guest 2]: And so that was sort of taken as an example of China's benevolence, you know, and look
[Guest 2]: at how we deal with our smaller neighbors.
[Guest 2]: Most of these deals are made at our own cost, whereas their cost was just that they wanted
[Guest 2]: these borders to be sealed and to not have any loopholes with them.
[Guest 2]: So this could have also been sort of another factor that was dealing in the politics between
[Guest 2]: people.
[Amit Varma]: No, and I want to get a wise track out of the way before I get on to my observations,
[Amit Varma]: which is when, you know, when Mao said we want to teach India a lesson, maybe he recognized
[Amit Varma]: how broken our education system is, and it still is today.
[Amit Varma]: So perhaps Nehru should have let him.
[Amit Varma]: But the irony of all this is that if you look at, you know, how the alignments are happening,
[Amit Varma]: despite all our claims of being non-aligned and all that, if you look at all the alignments,
[Amit Varma]: the Chinese in the 50s actually looked at Pakistan with a little bit of suspicion because
[Amit Varma]: hey, Pakistan is aligning with the US and it made complete sense for the Soviets, China
[Amit Varma]: and India to kind of form a block.
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, you know, when the 59 skirmishes happen and all that, and the Soviets make
[Amit Varma]: a statement in favor of India, initially, you know, it's a little bit awkward.
[Amit Varma]: And then, you know, Khrushchev and Mao meet and they have some interesting dialogues.
[Amit Varma]: And then the moment that Mao really chooses to step up Chinese aggression in 62 is when
[Amit Varma]: he knows that hey, US and Soviets are going to be busy because a Cuban crisis is happening.
[Amit Varma]: So he's like, okay, they are busy here.
[Amit Varma]: Let us bully this kid in our, in sort of our neighborhood.
[Amit Varma]: And the other thing that also strikes me is that something that Mao actually articulated
[Amit Varma]: and which would not have been a mystery at the time, is that China as far as it came
[Amit Varma]: to, you know, South Asia was not interested in taking territory, as we see even after
[Amit Varma]: the 62 war got over and in the offers of you and all, it's not like they wanted to conquer
[Amit Varma]: anyone.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, what you just said in the context of Pakistan, at the moment, Pakistan agreed
[Amit Varma]: to a deal, they actually gave them a little bit of territory makes sense, even, you know,
[Amit Varma]: during the 62 war, their strategy was okay, we just drive the Indians out and we get back
[Amit Varma]: to whatever the de facto line of control was, and then we call a ceasefire and we withdraw.
[Amit Varma]: And that was the whole game.
[Amit Varma]: So at some levels, you know, to get into that conflict, sort of end up kind of losing and
[Amit Varma]: everything that happened, seems to me to, you know, constitute a series of self goals.
[Amit Varma]: And I am so traumatized by the thought that I need a break.
[Amit Varma]: And I will share it with both of you and all our listeners.
[Amit Varma]: Are you one of those people who loves to be surrounded by beauty, let's say you like contemporary
[Amit Varma]: fine art, you want more of it in your life, but you don't have the time to visit galleries
[Amit Varma]: and buying art to hang on your walls can be expensive.
[Amit Varma]: Well, there is a way out, head on over to Indian colors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Indian colors licenses works of art from some of the finest modern Indian artists and adapts
[Amit Varma]: them into objects of everyday use, like dresses, shirts, tote bags, pouches, home decor items
[Amit Varma]: and much more.
[Amit Varma]: This makes art accessible to many more people and artists get royalties on every item you
[Amit Varma]: buy.
[Amit Varma]: Indian colors now has a new range of products out there, elegant summer dresses and men's
[Amit Varma]: evening shirts with unique motifs by artists like Tanmay Samanta, Manisha Ghera Baswani,
[Amit Varma]: Shruti Nelson, Pradeep Mishra, Harain Bakeel and Jaideep Mehrotra.
[Amit Varma]: Why should you not look classy even if you're stuck at home during the lockdown?
[Amit Varma]: There's also a new range of those iconic Indian color stoles, as well as home decor accessories
[Amit Varma]: like tissue paper holders, cushion covers, coasters, and more.
[Amit Varma]: And if you're missing your friends in these lockdown days, worry not, you can show them
[Amit Varma]: you're thinking of them by buying gifts for them from Indian colors.
[Amit Varma]: Corporate gifting is also available.
[Amit Varma]: So head on over to indiancolors.com.
[Amit Varma]: That's colors with an OU and make art a part of your life.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm chatting with Hamsini Hariharan and Shibani Mehta on what I realize much to my embarrassment
[Amit Varma]: is not Indo-China conflicts because that would involve Cambodia, but Sino-Indian conflicts.
[Guest 2]: Is that right Hamsini?
[Amit Varma]: Yes, that's completely right.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So we are talking about Sino-Indian conflicts.
[Amit Varma]: And we just finished chatting before the break about the 1962 war, you know, which we basically
[Amit Varma]: ended up losing, but the Chinese philosophy was not really to, you know, a colonial one
[Amit Varma]: of conquer territory and let us march to Delhi and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, they kind of proved their point, established sort of the lines of control that
[Amit Varma]: they wanted, and they headed back.
[Amit Varma]: Now what's the deal with the aftermath of the war?
[Amit Varma]: Like one thing which in an Indian context, everyone knows is that of course, VK Krishnamen
[Amit Varma]: and the defense minister was kind of disgraced and he had to quit.
[Amit Varma]: And all of that happened, which is, I think, what is known in the Indian popular imagination.
[Amit Varma]: But give me a deeper sense of what is the aftermath between both countries?
[Amit Varma]: What are you mentioned that there was schools of thought on it?
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about that, because I find that fascinating.
[Guest 2]: Sure.
[Guest 2]: So I think whenever you're looking at the 1962 war, I didn't really want to get into
[Guest 2]: sort of the specific, the war itself, because I'm not someone who served in the military
[Guest 2]: and therefore, I would not be the best person to speak about it.
[Guest 2]: But I think whenever you talk about the 1962 war, some clear strands really stick out at
[Guest 2]: you, right?
[Guest 2]: And the first is that, why did the Chinese withdraw in a month?
[Guest 2]: Why didn't they march down to Delhi or why didn't they march down to Assam?
[Guest 2]: And that is something that really came about.
[Guest 2]: The second was this question that how could they construct a highway in 1959 that we spoke
[Guest 2]: about earlier?
[Guest 2]: How could they rise to such commanding heights across this border?
[Guest 2]: And we didn't even have a clue.
[Guest 2]: So that intelligence failure was something that was repeatedly brought up.
[Guest 2]: And the third was something that military historians still talk about, which is, why
[Guest 2]: was offensive air power not used?
[Guest 2]: We had the Indian Air Force, which was possibly one of the best air forces at that time.
[Guest 2]: We had bases, we had aircraft.
[Guest 2]: So why didn't we use these?
[Guest 2]: So these were major questions that came about.
[Guest 2]: And I think, to be fair to the Indian establishment, they did take a lot of them into consideration.
[Guest 2]: There was a clear effort by the Indian government to rehaul intelligence, for example.
[Guest 2]: So this is when it was after the 1962 war that the R&AW, the Research and Analysis Wing,
[Guest 2]: was finally formed.
[Guest 2]: So you had a lot of internal reforms that took place.
[Guest 2]: Now when you think about the war itself, the first question that I asked, which is, why
[Guest 2]: did China just withdraw after a month?
[Guest 2]: This is possibly one of the shortest wars that have taken place.
[Guest 2]: You can look at the Sino-Indian conflict through two major schools of thought.
[Guest 2]: And both of them come down to this report called the Henderson-Brooks-Bhagat Report.
[Guest 2]: And the Henderson-Brooks-Bhagat Report is a report written by two Indian Armed Forces
[Guest 2]: officers who were both serving at that point in time.
[Guest 2]: And they'd written this report to point out that the Indian Army had intelligence, that
[Guest 2]: they believed that the forward policy that we'd spoken about was erroneous in a way.
[Guest 2]: And they pointed out clear gaps in the political vision of the border and of the tensions.
[Guest 2]: And so that clear misreading was picked up.
[Guest 2]: And the reason that the Henderson-Brooks-Bhagat Report is important is because the report
[Guest 2]: got leaked and it got into the hands of this Australian journalist called Neville Maxwell,
[Guest 2]: who didn't publish the report then.
[Guest 2]: He published parts of the report and then retracted it in 2014 on his website.
[Guest 2]: So before then, the only thing we could do was sort of take his word for it.
[Guest 2]: And what Maxwell essentially did was write a book called India's China War, where he
[Guest 2]: wrote a book along with other voices like Alistair Lamb, who writes his own book.
[Guest 2]: And what these authors essentially argue is that Nehru was wrong.
[Guest 2]: There were all of these glaring gaps in India's foreign policy.
[Guest 2]: Nehru misread the situation.
[Guest 2]: He was high handed.
[Guest 2]: And it is clearly India's fault that they went ahead with the forward policy.
[Guest 2]: And that's why the Chinese sort of struck back.
[Guest 2]: And there's even a very funny anecdote of Zhou Enlai and Mao having sort of a state
[Guest 2]: dinner with, I think, the Pakistani head of state, yeah, with Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto.
[Guest 2]: And Neville Maxwell is there, this is 1971.
[Guest 2]: And what Zhou does is he stands up and he calls for a toast.
[Guest 2]: And through his interpreter, he tells Neville Maxwell, he says, Mr. Maxwell, your book
[Guest 2]: has done a service to truth.
[Guest 2]: And China has benefited from that, stop quote.
[Guest 2]: So this is something that was immediately rubbished by a lot of Indian analysts, by
[Guest 2]: the Indian public.
[Guest 2]: Neville Maxwell had sort of a notorious reputation for being this China hand, as did Alistair
[Guest 2]: Lamb.
[Guest 2]: And to be fair, they raised a lot of pertinent questions that a lot of scholars at that point
[Guest 2]: in time were possibly not able to justify.
[Guest 2]: But I think it's also fair that a lot of criticisms have been leveled against them.
[Guest 2]: In particular, there's a book that Bertil Lintner wrote recently called China's India
[Guest 2]: War, which is a play on Maxwell's book.
[Guest 2]: And Indian authors and Lintner, they systematically refute a lot of the claims that Maxwell and
[Guest 2]: Lamb raised.
[Guest 2]: For example, if you remember, in the first half of the podcast, we spoke about sort of
[Guest 2]: this inner Tibet and outer Tibet, right?
[Guest 2]: And that was sort of the basis for the 1914 McMohan Line.
[Guest 2]: Lamb also points out that there was an inner line and an outer line in the Nifa region
[Guest 2]: in the Northeast.
[Guest 2]: And he says, the inner line was clearly what was put down by the British, which the inner
[Guest 2]: line still exists in some parts of the Northeast today, which didn't allow mainland Indians
[Guest 2]: in court to go to these regions.
[Guest 2]: And so he says, you know, this inner line itself proved that the Indians did not have
[Guest 2]: control over these regions, that these regions clearly came under South Tibet.
[Guest 2]: And this inner line is supposed to end where the McMohan Line ends, and so on.
[Guest 2]: And these claims are, a lot of them are misguided, a lot of them are just false.
[Guest 2]: So what I would say is that most scholars today, whenever they're talking about the
[Guest 2]: Sino-Indian War, follow one or two of these schools of thought. One believes that India
[Guest 2]: was responsible for the war, that it triggered Chinese aggression through the forward policy.
[Guest 2]: And the second believes that even if the forward policy was put down by Nehru, it was put down
[Guest 2]: because India was triggered by what China was doing in the regions.
[Guest 2]: So this is essentially how people categorize their views. The Maxwell Lamb School of Thought
[Guest 2]: has really influenced the way debate about Sino-Indian relations has been done for a
[Guest 2]: very long time. It's because their books came out in the 1970s. So they were possibly one
[Guest 2]: of the first few authoritarian works that was written. But over the last couple of years,
[Guest 2]: there's been more inquiry into the war. Yeah, so that's basically the two main schools of
[Amit Varma]: thought.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, so let me let me kind of sort of process that and sum that up. And you can tell me
[Amit Varma]: if I did that accurately. And this kind of raises a very interesting question, like,
[Amit Varma]: when you spoke of sort of Maxwell and Lamb being called, like China hands, as if they
[Amit Varma]: are sort of peddling the China narrative, and they obviously have their own incentives.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess all authors will have incentives of some kind or the other. It doesn't mean
[Amit Varma]: that a government is necessarily paying them, but in terms of access, or where they are
[Amit Varma]: based, or what are their intellectual communities like, and all of that, there will be these
[Amit Varma]: incentives. And you pointed out that there are two schools of thought. One is sort of
[Amit Varma]: the one which was dominant in the early years, I think Maxwell's book, India's China War
[Amit Varma]: came out in 1971. And, you know, that's a period you also refer to the fascinating meeting
[Amit Varma]: with the Pakistani and the Chinese. And the Chinese obviously had reason to be wary of
[Amit Varma]: the Indian because, you know, they saw the British as an imperialist colonial power.
[Amit Varma]: And they were worried that India even after independence would continue along those lines
[Amit Varma]: and Nehru's forward policy, you know, sparked off the conflict in which they behave responsibly.
[Amit Varma]: And you're pointing out at the other school of thought, which is something that is finding
[Amit Varma]: more voice now among Indian scholars and people like Berlin Lintner, who couldn't think of
[Amit Varma]: an entirely different title, he said, Uska book tha India's China War, I will be China's
[Amit Varma]: India War, but I get it. It's very smart, basically takes the whole approach of pointing
[Amit Varma]: out that listen, China was doing all of these little things, these border disagreements
[Amit Varma]: and so on through the 1950s, that they were the aggressors, they were the one who, you
[Amit Varma]: know, took Tibet to begin with. And Nehru was just trying to respond to that. So it's
[Amit Varma]: really not India's fault. You know, this seems to me one of the situations where whichever
[Amit Varma]: case you're making, you know, it's not like there is truth out there. You can essentially
[Amit Varma]: believe any version of these because we don't know what the main players are thinking. It's
[Amit Varma]: quite likely that in certain minds of the players involved, both accounts are completely
[Amit Varma]: true. Like Nehru may have felt he was entirely justified. And, you know, Xu may have felt
[Amit Varma]: what is this guy doing? And all of that. So, so yeah, I'm just kind of thinking aloud and
[Amit Varma]: trying to sum up what you said and given that this is the case, how does then policy towards
[Amit Varma]: each other in both these countries evolve? Like I presume the war is over. And China
[Amit Varma]: is like, okay, these guys were getting too fresh and we taught them a lesson. And for
[Amit Varma]: India, it's just a humiliation, but it's okay. Nehru dies a couple of years after and you'd
[Amit Varma]: imagine there is some kind of reset. And VK Krishnamenon is, you know, consigned to history.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, how do those sort of approaches within both countries domestically evolve
[Guest 2]: in that period?
[Guest 2]: When I think about it, I was speaking a little bit about how, you know, structures were overhauled
[Guest 2]: and stuff like that. And I think in India, since 62, we continue to have this insecurity
[Guest 2]: about China. I think it's just something that we have never gotten over, this sort of national
[Guest 2]: humiliation, you know, in a month they were able to completely override us. And I think
[Guest 2]: you continue to have those narratives today when we talk about India and China's relationships,
[Guest 2]: you know, about how there's a lot that's written about how Nehru died a heartbroken man, and
[Guest 2]: you could see that this clearly had an effect on his health. And I think, you know, the
[Guest 2]: war really left a lasting impression on India's narratives and the way it saw itself as a
[Guest 2]: country.
[Guest 2]: But I think more tangibly, you know, barely months after China and Pakistan reached their
[Guest 2]: first border agreements in a year, they completely finalized their border, which was something
[Guest 2]: that India was very angry about. And then in 1965, India and Pakistan fight another
[Guest 2]: war. And this is the time where there is a real fear that India would be fighting a two-front
[Guest 2]: war, right? And this is particularly true of Sikkim. Sikkim was at this point in time
[Guest 2]: still an independent Himalayan kingdom, right? So there are reports that when the war with
[Guest 2]: Pakistan was really beginning to heat up, the Chinese government sent a note asking
[Guest 2]: India to vacate from some of these posts that it had occupied along the border between Sikkim
[Guest 2]: and China. And the Indians were rather perplexed because they didn't really occupy anything.
[Guest 2]: So at that point in time, the governor said, you know what, just ignore the note, don't
[Guest 2]: respond to it. But the note was an ultimatum in that sense. It was saying, you know, if
[Guest 2]: you don't vacate in three days, then we will attack. And what essentially happened was
[Guest 2]: that India ignored the note, nothing came of it. And then the Chinese, I think at the
[Guest 2]: end of three days said, oh, thank you for vacating the land that you occupied, you know.
[Guest 2]: But that really drove the fear that what would India do if it was faced with a threat both
[Guest 2]: in its Eastern as well as its Western sectors. And this is when India really started looking
[Guest 2]: at how it was going to deal with threats along the border. Something else that's also happening
[Guest 2]: internally is you have to remember that the Northeast, as it looks right now, it's still
[Guest 2]: not very much in sort of the Indian's imagination, but it was even less at that point in time.
[Guest 2]: What happened was that the Chinese began to aid Naga rebels and, you know, more than about
[Guest 2]: 700 rebels were actually trained in Yunnan and, you know, provided with guns. And this
[Guest 2]: also happens with Manipuri revolutionaries, Mizo rebels, a lot of them get training and
[Guest 2]: support. Before we get into that in detail, I think there are a couple of other things
[Guest 2]: that I want to touch upon. One is the Communist Party in India. The left took a huge sort
[Guest 2]: of ideological beating in that sense. And the CPI split after 1962. And that's when,
[Guest 2]: you know, you have the CPI Marxist being formed. And this is because the CPI largely condemns
[Guest 2]: the war. Krishnamanand was essentially a part of it. And the CPI continues to condemn the
[Guest 2]: 1962 war. Whereas the CPI-M essentially saw the war as a fight between, you know, the
[Guest 2]: socialists and the capitalists. China being the socialists, us being the capitalists.
[Amit Varma]: So they were on the Chinese side. They were on the Chinese side. And after this, you know,
[Guest 2]: you have people like Karu Sanyal and others traveling to Nepal and finally going to Beijing,
[Guest 2]: where they meet Mao and were promised men in arms. So you have that thread that eventually
[Guest 2]: comes out to play. The other thing that happens is, you mentioned Krishnamanand, you also
[Guest 2]: have a lot of army officers who go into early retirement, you know, the Chief of Army Staff,
[Guest 2]: the Chief of General Staff. So a lot of them, even if they weren't directly responsible
[Guest 2]: for things that happened, still saw a lot of heads rolling.
[Guest 1]: So just adding to what Hamsini was saying about the humiliation that India faced, particularly
[Guest 1]: Nehru, after the 1962 war, this was something that Indira Gandhi, when she became Prime
[Guest 1]: Minister of India, knew she wanted to fix. She wanted to redeem the image of her father
[Guest 1]: and also redeem the image or the humiliation that the Prime Minister's office itself had
[Guest 1]: suffered in the country. And it can be argued that she was open to dialogue with China about
[Guest 1]: the territorial disputes. So while, you know, like Hamsini was saying, there was a lot of
[Guest 1]: argument about who was right on either side, there was this very small window in 1970,
[Guest 1]: when both India and China were open to dialogue. But they kind of just missed each other multiple
[Guest 1]: times. And this starts with on the 30th of April, 1970, the day before China celebrates
[Guest 1]: May Day, there was a display of fireworks. Now, remember at this point, diplomatic relations
[Guest 1]: between both countries have completely broken down. Ambassadors have been called back. So
[Guest 1]: there is no formal sort of representation. But there is an Indian representative in Brijesh
[Guest 1]: Mishra, who's at this display of fireworks. And during the meet and greet, he's approached
[Guest 1]: by Mao, who says, we cannot keep quarreling like this. Let us try and be friends. And
[Guest 1]: this is seen as an enthusiastic sort of move that China is making. Mao tells Brijesh Mishra
[Guest 1]: to convey this message to the Prime Minister, which he says that, you know, this is the
[Guest 1]: time we can sort of resume dialogue. And so both sides are open to it. The sort of conditions
[Guest 1]: in China, which is undergoing the Cultural Revolution, as Hamzani had pointed out, also
[Guest 1]: would have made negotiations easier because of the domestic conditions in China. And there
[Guest 1]: was some sort of civil unrest amongst the left in China itself. So the negotiation could
[Guest 1]: have been favourable for India. But there is a delay in response from the Indian side.
[Guest 1]: And Sudhendra Kulkarni has a two part series in The Wire about the events that lead up
[Guest 1]: to the 71 Bangladesh Liberation War and sort of explains the entire dynamic. So I would
[Guest 1]: recommend people reading that. But the reason there is a delay in replying from the Indian
[Guest 1]: side is because, again, what Hamzani pointed out, there is division between the CPI in
[Guest 1]: India and one side is seen favouring China, therefore being anti-government and anti-Indira
[Guest 1]: Gandhi, which did not please the Prime Minister. And second, there was a rising insecurity
[Guest 1]: towards Pakistan. So we see a distinct shift between Nehru and Indira Gandhi, where Nehru
[Guest 1]: was trying to be the peacemaker and trying to bring in the aspirations of all Asian powers
[Guest 1]: and achieve them collectively. But Indira Gandhi becomes more regional. She's driven
[Guest 1]: by securing regional security. And a lot of her actions and her foreign policy is driven
[Guest 1]: by that motivation. So there is some sort of a distraction with Pakistan and how that
[Guest 1]: is going to be handled at the same time. And this one here is really exciting for an international
[Guest 1]: relations scholar because you have a lot of players getting involved slowly. So this is
[Guest 1]: a time that the United States realises it has a chance to rebuild its relationship with
[Guest 1]: China. So you have President Nixon and NSA Kissinger arranging a meeting with China,
[Guest 1]: which is a sort of secretive meeting and it's aided by Pakistan. So Pakistan is also involved.
[Guest 1]: And what is argued is that the window that India had is sort of grabbed by the US and
[Guest 1]: Nixon is able to sort of re-establish relationships with China. Because Pakistan helped the United
[Guest 1]: States in doing that, India is unhappy and therefore turns to the Soviet Union, signs
[Guest 1]: the Treaty of Peace and Friendship as a security from Pakistan, which China in turn views as
[Guest 1]: an anti-China move. So a lot of things happen in that really short period. And of course,
[Guest 1]: then you have the Pakistan-Bangladesh Liberation War, which again takes a toll on the country
[Guest 1]: and that window sort of closes in the 70s.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And I had a fascinating episode on that year. I mean, basically the Bangladesh war
[Amit Varma]: with Srinath Raghavan, but he, you know, we spoke about the events of that year and how,
[Amit Varma]: if I remember correctly, Kissinger makes a secret trip to China and he pretends he's
[Amit Varma]: visiting Pakistan, but he, you know, flies down to China. And today they could just,
[Amit Varma]: you know, chat on WeChat or something and kind of say what they have to say while every
[Amit Varma]: other country watches on because they've hacked the phones. But let me also then sort of take
[Amit Varma]: a lateral detour and I'll come back to Indira Gandhi and what her policy was like and those
[Amit Varma]: very interesting years and what happened in the aftermath of that. And I also briefly
[Amit Varma]: want to talk about Sikkim, but just to take a lateral detour at the same time, you know,
[Amit Varma]: India's popular imagination is both shaped by and reflected in Bollywood to a certain
[Amit Varma]: extent, right. Or, you know, other regional cinema and all that. And I found that, you
[Amit Varma]: know, popular culture often acts as a barometer of what people think and feel in the culture.
[Amit Varma]: So Shibani, tell me a little bit about, you know, how was China looked at in the Indian
[Amit Varma]: popular imagination? Like even today, you know, Indians are very xenophobic towards
[Amit Varma]: the Chinese. So what was sort of attitudes like, how were they evolving? You know, there
[Amit Varma]: was also this Hindi-Chini bhai bhai stuff that had kind of happened. Give me some rope
[Guest 1]: on that.
[Guest 1]: So Bollywood presents a very interesting case to understand national sentiment. I should
[Guest 1]: say that I haven't been exposed to regional cinema, so I can't speak for what's happening
[Guest 1]: there. If anyone has recommendations on what I would watch, please let me know. I'd love
[Guest 1]: to do that. But speaking about Bollywood, so in the 50s, cinema felt, or Hindi cinema,
[Guest 1]: there was a lot of social responsibility in the film. You had Guru Dutt's Pyaasa, which
[Guest 1]: was a critique of a materialistic society. The same year, you had Mother India, which
[Guest 1]: was, you know, the Indian nation state as it existed in the villages. And then you also
[Guest 1]: had B. R. Chopra's Naya Daur, which was, you know, a salutation to Nehruvian socialism.
[Guest 1]: So there's a lot of celebration of the birth of India, the growth of India, and, you know,
[Guest 1]: what the aspirations that India has. With the 62nd war, you see a departure from social
[Guest 1]: responsibility and move towards escapist entertainment. So you have films like Theesri Manzil, A Jewel
[Guest 1]: Thief, Guide, and Vakht that come in the 60s, which are just purely for entertainment. They're
[Guest 1]: not thrillers, they're dramas, there's romance. Films are being shot in foreign locations.
[Guest 1]: And it's just pure entertainment value. The only movie about the 1962 war, which you quoted,
[Guest 1]: is Hakikatt that came out two years after the war in 1964. And this movie is also been,
[Guest 1]: it oversympathizes with the Indian side. It tries to, you know, sort of bring down the
[Guest 1]: humiliation that India felt and, you know, play up the loss of life of soldiers and things
[Guest 1]: like that. But I should point out that it does not villainize the Chinese. So it is
[Guest 1]: only looking at the Indian point of view, what happened with the soldiers, goes into
[Guest 1]: the personal lives of some of the characters, but there is no villainization of the Chinese
[Guest 1]: side. It was just a war that went wrong. And yeah, after that, the few films about India,
[Guest 1]: so I think you had Shaheed, which was based on the life of Bhagat Singh that came in 1965.
[Guest 1]: But that's again, pre-independence. So again, going back to that freedom, notion of freedom
[Guest 1]: struggle and stuff, but nothing really touches upon Indian society till you have the angry
[Guest 1]: young man making an appearance almost a decade later.
[Amit Varma]: So it's almost like, you know, it was just a dark moment, and we chose to blot it out
[Amit Varma]: of the collective imagination and pretend it never happened. Because, you know, it's
[Amit Varma]: much easier to sort of, like the constant sort of nationalistic trope that has happened
[Amit Varma]: in the decades since is, you know, where you show Pakistanis as a villain and you're fighting
[Amit Varma]: the ISI and Sunny Deol is going to the border with a big gun and saving all of us. But China
[Amit Varma]: is just something that we choose to sort of not think about because, hey, look what happened.
[Amit Varma]: Let's get back to the politics. I mean, as you guys would know, I am no fan of Indira
[Amit Varma]: Gandhi for all the things she did in the domestic sphere. But at the same time, as far as her
[Amit Varma]: geopolitical sort of acumen was concerned, she seems to have kind of done a much better
[Amit Varma]: job, one in the way she handled the Bangladesh war. And if I'm not mistaken, and Hamsa maybe
[Amit Varma]: you can sort of elaborate on this, she also seems to have moved away from Nehru's mistaken
[Amit Varma]: idealism and actually taken a much more hard-nosed, realistic view of what one, a realist view
[Amit Varma]: rather of what one needed to do in the, in the neighborhood. So tell me a little bit
[Amit Varma]: about that. I mean, and also, you know, one thing that kind of intrigues me is today,
[Amit Varma]: of course, there is a lot of talk and I've had episodes in this as well about how sort
[Amit Varma]: of China and, you know, the worry of between China and Pakistan kind of getting close together
[Amit Varma]: and how that's going to impact us. And there was recent talk that, you know, when Nepal
[Amit Varma]: caught the snow catastrophes, because, you know, they've been emboldened by China kind
[Amit Varma]: of getting there. Were these worries back then, you know, in the 70s and 80s? So sort
[Amit Varma]: of take me through a bit of that period.
[Guest 2]: Sure. Amit, just something that I wanted to just briefly go up on before we get into the
[Guest 2]: 1970s, is that in the 1960s, one important thing happens, which is an other sort of clash
[Guest 2]: between India and China. And this happens in 67, a little before the 70s and the Bangladesh
[Guest 2]: war and all of that. And the reason why it's important is because accepting the current
[Guest 2]: crisis at Kalwa, that was the last crisis where India lost men across the line of actual
[Guest 2]: control. So what actually happens in 1967 is, there's still not a lot of scholarship
[Guest 2]: that's done on it. There's a new book by Prabal Das Gupta called Watershed 1967. So what essentially
[Guest 2]: happens in 1967 is that you have the two passes in Sikkim, Chola and Nathula, where we were
[Guest 2]: afraid that the Chinese would also fight against in 65. The Indians decided to fence that border.
[Guest 2]: And while they were fencing the border, often there were Chinese troops that came about
[Guest 2]: saying that you can't fence this border because you're in our territory. And in one of those
[Guest 2]: scuffles, there were both Indian and Chinese lives lost. As a scholar, I will say that
[Guest 2]: objectively we don't have a number, an exact number of the number of lives that were lost
[Guest 2]: during that point in time. The lowest numbers put it at 30 on the Chinese side and 60 on
[Guest 2]: the Indian side and the highest numbers put it on 350 on the Chinese side. So that is
[Guest 2]: something that we need to keep an open mind towards. But these clashes did happen. And
[Guest 2]: the other thing that sort of came out of it, which Shivani referred to when she was talking
[Guest 2]: about Indira Gandhi, the reason we didn't have any ambassadors present in China is because
[Guest 2]: in 67, in the same year, two Indian embassy officials were accused by the Chinese of spying.
[Guest 2]: And so they were beaten by the Red Guards. They were publicly humiliated. And they were
[Guest 2]: eventually, you know, the Indian embassy was supposedly under siege for days with people
[Guest 2]: standing outside, you know, clamoring to get in. And other embassies tried to send in,
[Guest 2]: you know, supplies, but they couldn't get through. And then when the Indians heard of
[Guest 2]: it, the exact same thing happened here. The Chinese ambassadors were beaten up. They were,
[Guest 2]: and essentially all of them were deported and became sort of like persona non grata.
[Guest 2]: And that is one of the reasons why relations sired even more. And when Indira Gandhi comes
[Guest 2]: into office, that's sort of, you know, the last exchange that India and China have had
[Guest 2]: on an ambassadorial level. I think I agree with you. I am not a big fan of what Indira
[Guest 2]: Gandhi's policies were domestically, but on a foreign policy landscape, she dealt with
[Guest 2]: a lot of challenges that India was facing very, very well. The Bangladesh war, which
[Guest 2]: you have spoken about in detail for one. I think the other, it was from then on this
[Guest 2]: prevailing worry that India would lose its neighborhood, right? And why the Indira Gandhi
[Guest 2]: government onwards were afraid of this is because, as I'd mentioned, the Chinese were
[Guest 2]: providing resources to rebel groups. At one point in time, there was this idea that a
[Guest 2]: red corridor would be formed, right? Like the Naxalite movement was coming to the fore,
[Guest 2]: that it would go through India, go through Nepal, and finally go to China. And this was
[Guest 2]: sort of the revolution spreading to all across the world. But I think Indira Gandhi was,
[Guest 2]: and this is sort of one of the great things about studying the foreign policy about that
[Guest 2]: period, is that, you know, in 1976, both countries exchanged ambassadors for the first time.
[Guest 2]: And you know what happens immediately, the emergency, so nothing else happened. And so
[Guest 2]: Indira Gandhi didn't really have any other contact with the Chinese while she was in
[Guest 2]: power. When the Janaka government comes in, for a very brief period, what happens is that
[Guest 2]: Vajpayee visits Beijing, but he had to cut his trip short, because he was protesting
[Guest 2]: the Chinese invasion of Vietnam. And then you move forward, Indira Gandhi comes back
[Guest 2]: to power. And the main issue then doesn't turn out to be the border, it doesn't turn
[Guest 2]: out to be relations in the neighborhood. It's very odd, but from what I can read, the main
[Guest 2]: issues at that point in time was that in Indochina, there was the war between Vietnam and Cambodia.
[Guest 2]: And in Cambodia, you had the Khmer Rouge, who the Chinese were backing, and you had
[Guest 2]: the People's Republic of Kampuchea, which was Vietnamese backed. And the main issue
[Guest 2]: between India and China was supposedly the Indian government's recognition of the People's
[Guest 2]: Republic of Kampuchea. And that became a huge issue for some reason. And that was the sort
[Guest 2]: of roadblock between relations.
[Guest 1]: So adding to what Hamsini was saying about Indira Gandhi's foreign policy, it's the
[Guest 1]: first time we see a departure from non-alignment, because Indira Gandhi, like you said, was
[Guest 1]: more of a realist than her father was. And there was an inclination towards balance of
[Guest 1]: power politics. And she also displayed a greater willingness to use coercive tactics and force.
[Guest 1]: But the challenge that, you know, the Indian government faced during the 70s is that there
[Guest 1]: was no stability. Governments were coming and going very quickly. And there was a lot
[Guest 1]: of domestic disturbance that it had to cope with, because of which, as Hamsini was saying,
[Guest 1]: you would establish contact with the Chinese, but you wouldn't be able to engage with China,
[Guest 1]: because something else would happen.
[Amit Varma]: Right. And Hamsini, I also want you to sort of briefly mention on, you know, was what
[Amit Varma]: happened in Sikkim significant there? Just bring me up to speed on that. And also, just
[Amit Varma]: sort of another point I'd like you to clarify, which is, you know, when we use the term,
[Amit Varma]: the line of actual control, and there is sort of in the popular imagination of border is
[Amit Varma]: one line, right? So it's a line and on one side, you have the Indians and on the other
[Amit Varma]: side, you have the Chinese. But actually, there is no line in the sense that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: both countries are quite clear about what territory definitely belongs to them. But
[Amit Varma]: there is also a sort of no man's land in between where there is, you know, much ambiguity and
[Amit Varma]: uncertainty. And a lot of action happens on that no man's land, like allegedly in 67,
[Amit Varma]: or recently, what happened in Galwan, which is why you know, you could actually have a
[Amit Varma]: conflict on territory that was not Chinese territory. But at the same time, the Prime
[Amit Varma]: Minister wasn't entirely wrong when he said they haven't come into our territory. It was
[Amit Varma]: sort of like a kind of a buffer zone. Is that understanding broadly correct?
[Guest 2]: Yeah, I mean, I'm not again, as I said, like a military specialist, but I think that is
[Guest 2]: a good way to sum up the line of actual control. You know, as much as we like to imagine, you
[Guest 2]: know, maps in our heads, and you have this specific thing that separates India from China.
[Guest 2]: That's not exactly true. You know, in 1962, the Chinese, you know, swept into India, and
[Guest 2]: then they drew back to what they believed was the line that was supposed to be the border
[Guest 2]: between India and China. And we there have been a lot of border talks and stuff that
[Guest 2]: I can get into, which were exchanged. And there is this sort of agreement that these
[Guest 2]: are the Indian and Chinese positions and you keep a couple of sometimes less than a couple
[Guest 2]: of kilometers in between that neither side shall pass through. And this is essentially
[Guest 2]: the problem even with the clashes that happened this year. Therefore, this fundamental misunderstanding
[Guest 2]: about knowing what the border actually is. I remember reading some reports about this
[Guest 2]: crisis talking about, oh, does China refer to the border as what it had captured in 1962?
[Guest 2]: Because if that's the definition of the border that it's going by, then it's going to be
[Guest 2]: a real problem, right? So that's one of the main problems, the line of actual control,
[Guest 2]: unlike the LOC, the border with Pakistan, which is fenced, which for the most part,
[Guest 2]: is clearly demarcated. The LAC is very ambiguous. About Sikkim, right? So during the 1970s,
[Guest 2]: as Shivani had spoken about, there was a lot of worry about neighborhood stability. There
[Guest 2]: was also, you know, personal anxiety about from Indira Gandhi's end about instability
[Guest 2]: within the country, right? And this is where Sikkim becomes really interesting, because
[Guest 2]: Sikkim was this independent kingdom, and it was independent the same way Bhutan was independent.
[Guest 2]: So Sikkim and Bhutan both had treaties with India, where India said, you know, it would
[Guest 2]: advise these governments on external affairs and so on, which India continues to do for
[Guest 2]: Bhutan. Whereas what happened with Sikkim is that the Chokyal or the leader of the Sikkim
[Guest 2]: kingdom married an American, and there was a lot of vitriol directed towards her, particularly
[Guest 2]: by the Indians. A lot of people said, you know, she was a CIA spy. And she was, you
[Guest 2]: know, influencing the kingdom to go against India. And, you know, we won't know if that's
[Guest 2]: true, just because, you know, she's a woman and in a powerful position, or if she was
[Guest 2]: actually a CIA spy. But that's not really the point, right? The point is that you were
[Guest 2]: suddenly dealing with another problem on this front. And this is a front where you've already
[Guest 2]: had a clash with Justin 67. So I did an episode on states of anarchy with a scholar called
[Guest 2]: Deep Pal recently. And we were talking about this. And what I was essentially asking him
[Guest 2]: was, you know, why did Sikkim get annexed by the Indian kingdom? And why didn't Bhutan,
[Guest 2]: you know, why was there sort of a disparity between Indian foreign policy towards the
[Guest 2]: two? And what he says, which I think makes a lot of sense, is that this fits into the
[Guest 2]: Sikkimese imagination of India's perception towards itself, towards India, as well as
[Guest 2]: of Sikkim. So I'm going to break that down a little bit. Essentially, what that means
[Guest 2]: is that India had a perception of itself as a country. And it perceived Bhutan and Sikkim
[Guest 2]: into fitting into that imagination in a particular way. And Bhutan did. Bhutanese army officers,
[Guest 2]: for example, were trained in India. Bhutan fell in line with a lot of things that India
[Guest 2]: wanted. India in return gave it military aid and continues to give it military aid. Sikkim,
[Guest 2]: on the other hand, was starting to show a lot of signs of wanting more. And India was
[Guest 2]: afraid that this was going to have to be yet another border that they would have to contend
[Guest 2]: with. And that was not really something that they could deal with. There are a lot of books
[Guest 2]: that are written about the annexation of Sikkim alone. But I think one of the reasons why
[Guest 2]: Sikkim was incorporated into the Indian Union was definitely its place on the border between
[Guest 2]: India and China.
[Amit Varma]: And how did China react to that?
[Guest 2]: China did protest because it saw this as sort of a unilateral move by India. And for years,
[Guest 2]: China didn't really recognize that Sikkim was a part of India. So that was something
[Guest 2]: that was part of relations. Imagine that it reacted the same way that it would if Ladakh
[Guest 2]: was made a union territory. So that's sort of the same pitch of the reaction that India
[Guest 2]: is unilaterally changing borders and unilaterally changing the status quo. So that's something
[Guest 2]: that's very important that happens in the 1970s. As you sort of move towards the 80s,
[Guest 2]: even under Indira Gandhi, you have sort of the first visit of the Chinese foreign minister
[Guest 2]: in 1981. And then you have five rounds of border talks. And these are important because
[Guest 2]: 20 years after the original crisis is when both countries begin to agree that they actually
[Guest 2]: have a problem on their hands. And they both took very different views to it. China wanted
[Guest 2]: to shelve the border issue and it wanted to focus on other things like trade. And India
[Guest 2]: wanted to resolve the border issue first.
[Guest 2]: So the other thing that was important to note in these border talks is that India wanted
[Guest 2]: a sector by sector approach, which China really didn't want. What a sector by sector approach
[Guest 2]: essentially is, is that the Indian border, the LAC in the Indian imagination is divided
[Guest 2]: into three bits, right? You have the eastern sector, which is Arunachal Pradesh and Sikkim.
[Guest 2]: You have the central sector, which is sort of near the border of Nepal, all the way to
[Guest 2]: where the Skiti Valley of Himachal Pradesh is. And then you have the western sector,
[Guest 2]: which is Ladakh. So what India wanted was to say, hey, let's talk about where you think
[Guest 2]: the border is on the eastern sector and where we think the border is in the eastern sector.
[Guest 2]: And we can look at it from that point of view. The Chinese, on the other hand, wanted a quid
[Guest 2]: pro quo. They said, no, Aksai Chinnazar's, Tawang Nifa is yours. And we will agree to
[Guest 2]: that. We will not agree to a sector by sector approach. And this is something that really
[Guest 2]: held up border talks for a couple of years.
[Guest 2]: So just moving ahead to what happens with Rajiv Gandhi essentially is that I think you
[Guest 2]: have to remember that the 1980s in both India and China are very, very important, right?
[Guest 2]: China for the first time liberalizes its economy. You have Deng Xiaoping who comes up and says,
[Guest 2]: you know, it doesn't matter if a cat is black or white, as long as it chases the mice. And
[Guest 2]: China really wants to set aside its ideological biases that it had been carrying forward for
[Guest 2]: the first 20 years in its foreign policy. And you see this reflected in all of Chinese
[Guest 2]: foreign policy, actually. The 1980s is a really interesting time to study in China. And India
[Guest 2]: is also sort of the stirrings of liberalization, if I might call it that. But I think a couple
[Guest 2]: of important things also happened during this time. And the first is in 1986, Arunachal
[Guest 2]: Pradesh was granted full statehood. And this was something that really pissed the Chinese
[Guest 2]: off, because it was India unilaterally changing status quo. In 1986, you have clashes along
[Guest 2]: the Sundaram Chu, which is basically military exercises of India in Arunachal Pradesh, which
[Guest 2]: finally lead to escalation. People don't really lose lives, both sides manage to de-escalate
[Guest 2]: the issue, and then go back to their respective sides of the border. But this crisis essentially
[Guest 2]: turns the tide in India-China relations, because after this is when N.D. Tiwari suggests that
[Guest 2]: India and China expand cooperation in other fields, like it's a completely new idea. And
[Guest 2]: this is when the Chinese finally, supposedly understood for the first time since 62, that
[Guest 2]: the Indians didn't go to war. So until this time, the Chinese claim that they didn't really
[Guest 2]: get a sense that the Indians wanted peace along the border. They only understood that
[Guest 2]: Indians were being extremely aggressive along the border. So finally, a year later, Rajiv
[Guest 2]: Gandhi goes to China. And this trip is the first time in 30-odd years that an Indian
[Guest 2]: head of state has visited China. So this is an important moment in India-China relations.
[Guest 2]: But Rajiv Gandhi faces a lot of criticism for it within India. And this is because a
[Guest 2]: lot of people point out that he was the one who recognized that Tibet was a part of China.
[Guest 2]: But he did this unilaterally. The Chinese didn't really offer anything in return. They
[Guest 2]: didn't recognize Sikkim, they didn't recognize Arunachal Pradesh. And so Rajiv Gandhi was
[Guest 2]: really criticized at that point in time by the opposition that he was giving away a lot
[Guest 2]: of the Indian standing on the issue.
[Amit Varma]: So a sort of a couple of thoughts. One is I'll actually object to your characterization
[Amit Varma]: of those years as the early years of liberalization. Yeah, I do. I think that's a post-factual
[Amit Varma]: narrative that you know, people are trying to give the family some credit for the good
[Amit Varma]: that came out of liberalization. And I am not sure how much truth there is to that.
[Amit Varma]: But quite apart from that, what I sort of, you know, kind of see happening is that one
[Amit Varma]: obviously deng moving towards more of a market economy within China, also signals a fundamental
[Amit Varma]: mindset shift, which impacts everything, not just, you know, economics locally, but also
[Amit Varma]: foreign policy, because a mindset shift is one of, you know, positive, some growth where
[Amit Varma]: you trade and everybody benefits and blah, blah, blah. And it seems to me that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: that approach starts showing off in other domains as well, possibly one, would you agree
[Amit Varma]: with that? Is that true? And true with India, there is an increase of assertiveness in the
[Amit Varma]: region, for example, the nonsense that Rajiv Gandhi gets up to in Sri Lanka, for example.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, does that sort of play a part where they are trying to balance China's influence?
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, how is the thinking developing on the respective roles of the two countries
[Guest 2]: within South Asia at this point in time? Amit, I would sort of object to your saying that
[Guest 2]: moving towards market economy is a fundamental shift for the same reason why you object that
[Guest 2]: I call it stirrings of liberalization, right? Because China also, you know, now when we
[Guest 2]: look back, we look at it as this one long continuous history. But at that point in time,
[Guest 2]: it was just the end of the Cultural Revolution. It was the fall of, you know, the fall. And
[Guest 2]: therefore, people were also really scared to experiment. No one knew if anything that
[Guest 2]: was going to happen in China was going to continue for, forget a long period of time,
[Guest 2]: for even a short period of time, right? So there is this shift that occurs, but I would
[Guest 2]: say it occurs in the latter half of the 1980s rather than the first half. Because the Chinese
[Guest 2]: government at that point in time also starts only with policy experimentation. It doesn't
[Guest 2]: do these big sweeping reforms that it now claims that it's done, you know. And we can
[Guest 2]: argue about this till the cows come home. There are different views about this. But
[Guest 2]: at least my take on this is that the shifts in foreign policy, the shifts in the economy
[Guest 2]: are still small. There is a marked difference in what happened earlier, which is, you know,
[Guest 2]: a personality cult driven, ideologically minded foreign policy, which essentially looked at
[Guest 2]: expanding, you know, the revolution across the world. I think what China wanted by this
[Guest 2]: point in time was to not open up. Those are, at the end of the day, not the words that
[Guest 2]: they use, but they wanted to focus on improving the quality of life. They wanted to focus
[Guest 2]: on just becoming richer. And the only way that they could see this happening was to
[Guest 2]: have some semblance of stability in the economy. And you can't have any semblance of stability
[Guest 2]: in the economy if your foreign policy is constantly denouncing other countries or getting into
[Guest 2]: tips with them. The other thing I think we need to remember with respect to your second
[Guest 2]: question, you know, about whether there's an increase in assertiveness in the region.
[Guest 2]: I think it's important to remember that during this time, particularly in the late 1980s,
[Guest 2]: there's a lot of worry about the Soviet Union, because Gorbachev had made some speeches about
[Guest 2]: Glasnost and Perestroika, but it was still difficult to read those signals. No one knew
[Guest 2]: that the Soviet Union was going to fall at this point in time. But I think, at least
[Guest 2]: from what I've read, is that Rajiv Gandhi wanted to also diversify his foreign policy.
[Guest 2]: And when I mean him, I don't mean him as a person, but rather the foreign policy administration
[Guest 2]: that he was commanding, is that the establishment at that point in time wanted to go ahead with
[Guest 2]: non-alignment and realize that if they would lose the Soviet Union, then they needed to
[Guest 2]: be on better terms with the Chinese, because that balance that Shivani had mentioned a
[Guest 2]: couple of years ago would be lost otherwise. What do you think, Shivani?
[Guest 1]: You're absolutely right. I think India was aware of the association that it had with
[Guest 1]: the Soviet Union, had a negative impact on India's image because of the Soviet Union's
[Guest 1]: involvement in Afghanistan. And it wanted to keep the Soviet Union at a distance. And
[Guest 1]: that's why in the 80s, you see there's a push to build relationships with the US and China.
[Guest 1]: But most of the energies went towards the Indian subcontinent. So you have Pakistan,
[Guest 1]: Sri Lanka, like Amit pointed out, as well as Nepal. And that's what's occupying most
[Guest 1]: of the time for the Ministry of External Affairs.
[Amit Varma]: And Shivani, I'll turn to you now as we kind of take the narrative forward. But before
[Amit Varma]: that, we'll take the narrative back briefly. My sense of the sort of when the economics
[Amit Varma]: of China kind of started shifting is also, you know, the late 70s was an important time
[Amit Varma]: where they made a move away from collectivist farming and a slightly deeper recognition
[Amit Varma]: of property rights at that level. But I mean, leave that aside is obviously a process which
[Amit Varma]: takes many years. So Shivani kind of like moving forward and coming all the way to sort
[Amit Varma]: of eventually to the 2000s and Hu Jintao and China's really changing through this period
[Amit Varma]: and equally, their foreign policy is really changing. And these shifts are really interesting
[Amit Varma]: the shift to sort of whose approach to towards foreign policy and the world in general and,
[Amit Varma]: you know, how he internally looks at China, and then later, the much more aggressive authoritarian
[Amit Varma]: tone that she has taken since so you know, so take me through this sort of historical
[Amit Varma]: shift and what's happening here.
[Guest 1]: So in the last 20 years, a lot has changed. But if we go back to the 2000s, at this time,
[Guest 1]: Deng's philosophy of hide your capabilities and bide your time is still very important
[Guest 1]: for Chinese foreign policy. Beijing has made a pragmatic accommodations and is learning
[Guest 1]: to live with the hegemon, which is the United States. And so policy adjustments are made
[Guest 1]: according to this reality. What happens in 2001 is 9-11, US is now concentrating all
[Guest 1]: of its efforts to against international terrorism and becomes obsessed with Iraq. And this gives
[Guest 1]: China somewhat of a window to start being assertive, and to be a little more vocal about
[Guest 1]: its interests, which it hadn't been doing so far, at least internationally. And, you
[Guest 1]: know, China uses the 2000s to signal its intent as a rising power and what are these aspirations,
[Guest 1]: the Chinese leadership slowly includes more and more controversial issues and expands
[Guest 1]: this list of China's core interests. So the pursuit of foreign policy becomes this, we
[Guest 1]: are just China is just pursuing its core interests, and it becomes a little more assertive. So
[Guest 1]: you have the South China Sea being mentioned, territorial disputes with Japan coming up
[Guest 1]: being mentioned. There are certain things being talked about with the Southeast Asian
[Guest 1]: countries, etc. And so China is growing increasingly confident. And unfortunately, for China, there's
[Guest 1]: a moment of frustration with the 2008 economic meltdown. So after the 2008 economic meltdown,
[Guest 1]: China has to calibrate all of its efforts and ensure the socioeconomic makeup of China
[Guest 1]: is not damaged significantly. And suddenly, it has to sort of balance wanting to be a
[Guest 1]: great power, but also, you know, being responsible for towards its domestic audience. So it's
[Guest 1]: in this, under Hu Jintao, China is in this middle state where it wants to, you know,
[Guest 1]: eat at the table with the big kids, it's ready to do that. But also, there's a lot of stuff
[Guest 1]: happening back home that it needs to pay attention to. And there are questions about whether
[Guest 1]: China is ready to be, to take on the responsibilities of being a world power.
[Amit Varma]: And it's interesting that you know, you refer to those years as a middle state, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the middle state of the Middle Kingdom, that could be the title of your first book. And
[Amit Varma]: that also then seems to indicate that there is a transition happening here, that you have
[Amit Varma]: a China, which is kind of, it's a rising power, it's asserting itself, it's looking at, you
[Amit Varma]: know, itself vis-a-vis the US. And then gradually, what happens is you have the 2008 shift and
[Amit Varma]: China's, you know, you know, telling the US that, you know, what the hell we were following
[Amit Varma]: you and, you know, what is this that you've done? And, and then under Xi, you have this
[Amit Varma]: sort of a much greater assertiveness where like, would it be fair to say then that this
[Amit Varma]: is no longer a middle state? Now, China said that, okay, we have arrived and we are going
[Amit Varma]: to compete with everybody. And we are going to cock a snooker to you. And, you know, we
[Amit Varma]: are taking our place. Is it fair to say that that's the change in approach that has happened?
[Guest 1]: So one of the things that changed with Xi coming to power is earlier, while China was
[Guest 1]: being assertive, there was not a very strong link between its global power aspirations
[Guest 1]: and what it was doing towards achieving them. That's what Xi has been able to do very successfully.
[Guest 1]: And there's a very decisive leadership style that he follows. And also, like when you think
[Guest 1]: of Xi coming to power, the first few things that come to your mind are the anti-corruption
[Guest 1]: campaign that he ran, President for Life. But there has been a very calculated and gradual
[Guest 1]: move that has been facilitated by events that took place in the 2000s, which are allowing
[Guest 1]: Xi to sort of reap the benefits of an assertive China in the international stage. Robert Blackwell
[Guest 1]: and Kurt Campbell, when they write about Xi's foreign policy, say that one of the things
[Guest 1]: that make him different or this foreign policy different is, this phase of foreign policy
[Guest 1]: different is Xi's willingness to use every instrument of statecraft, from military assets
[Guest 1]: to geo-economic intimidation, as well as economic rewards, which we see in the form of the Belt
[Guest 1]: and Road Initiative, to pursue the geopolitical objectives that China has. And I would also
[Guest 1]: like to point out that Xi's policies exhibit a continuity. So a lot of scholars argue that
[Guest 1]: this is new and it's different, yes, but it's not new. It's not unexpected. There is a continuity.
[Guest 1]: It's just an increase in assertiveness on, say, territorial matters and in the East China
[Guest 1]: Sea and South China Sea. But Deng's high-deal capabilities and by-deal time have naturally
[Guest 1]: expired now. This is the right moment. Xi happens to be in the moment. If there was
[Guest 1]: anyone else, the results would probably have been the same.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, so that kind of repudiating the great man theory of history and saying that this
[Amit Varma]: is how foreign policy and geopolitics was evolving anyway. And what's also interesting
[Amit Varma]: in the last few years is that just in terms of coherence of geopolitical policy, America
[Amit Varma]: has completely fallen apart with Trump at the helm and you have all these insane trade
[Amit Varma]: wars, which would have been unforeseeable, I think, years ago, because they just make
[Amit Varma]: absolutely no sense. It's a negative-sum game against the world. And at the same time, it
[Amit Varma]: seems to me that what China has done is, you know, very focused, very cogent in terms of,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the Belt and Road, which in fact, I'll ask you to kind of expand on because
[Amit Varma]: it seems to me to be a very good sort of illustration of how they are using their economic power
[Amit Varma]: to enhance their standing in the world and their influence over other countries.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about, you know, Belt and Road and what's happening there. And it
[Amit Varma]: also seems to me, and tell me if you guys agree with it, that, you know, Indian foreign
[Amit Varma]: policy towards China doesn't, or towards the region, doesn't seem to have any of the same
[Amit Varma]: cogency, where we, you know, we are following the reflexive patterns of the past, in a sense,
[Amit Varma]: and doing the same old, same old, while China actually has, like, a focused vision on how
[Amit Varma]: to deal with the region and how to deal with India. Hamsri, would you say that that's...
[Guest 2]: Okay, this is a couple of different things at play, right? What I wanted to point out
[Guest 2]: earlier to you, Amit, is that you talked about how US foreign policy with Trump at the helm
[Guest 2]: seems to be falling apart. And I think one important thing in what Shivani was talking
[Guest 2]: about is also other countries' reactions to China, right? And Hu Jintao, and like much
[Guest 2]: of Chinese foreign policy in the 2000s, is devoted in telling people that China is going
[Guest 2]: to rise peacefully, that China is not a hegemonic power, like the United States or any other
[Guest 2]: imperialist country, because China has gone through, you know, the century of humiliation
[Guest 2]: and has emerged to the other side. So their rise is not going to be the rise of any other
[Guest 2]: country. But what happens with the 2008 crisis? And 2008 is also important, at least in Beijing's
[Guest 2]: history, it sees it as important because 2008 is the year that Beijing hosts the Olympics,
[Guest 2]: right? And this is supposed to really mark the year that China arrives. And I think what
[Guest 2]: happens around this time, 2010-11, when Obama comes to power, you have Hillary Clinton talking
[Guest 2]: about the Asian century, you have a lot of people across Australia and Singapore starting
[Guest 2]: to talk about the Indo-Pacific century. And the reason why the Asia-Pacific, the Indo-Pacific
[Guest 2]: really come into parlance and really come into the spotlight is because India, and to
[Guest 2]: a greater extent China, at that time faced fewer effects of the 2008 crisis. And this
[Guest 2]: is the point where you have a lot of reform that is being called for, right? This is when
[Guest 2]: BRICS and the AIIB and all of these ideas really come to the fore, or the G20, because
[Guest 2]: now it's being seen as, oh, the world is no longer just the US and perhaps Russia. It's
[Guest 2]: all of these smaller countries in Asia that are going to take over. And I guess over the
[Guest 2]: last decade, we've seen that change as well with Xi. And I think what Shivani's pointed
[Guest 2]: out is very, very important with respect to how assertive that Xi is being. But I would
[Guest 2]: say that there's often a fallacy, Amit, that when you're outside China, what China is doing
[Guest 2]: seems to be like a concerted effort, that they have a vision, that they know what they're
[Guest 2]: doing. And I think, for the most part, they don't. I'm not going to discount what China
[Guest 2]: is doing. But I think that this is part of Chinese strategy, that they want to convince
[Guest 2]: the world that they do have a vision for it, that all of this is going towards the great
[Guest 2]: socialist society, whatever that might be, right? And I would really, you know, question
[Guest 2]: our biases in thinking about all of China's foreign policy as following a single file
[Guest 2]: narrative in that sense. But that does not mean that India is not middling through its
[Guest 2]: foreign policy in the neighborhood. Shivani would be a better person to talk about that.
[Guest 2]: But I do believe that perhaps Indian foreign policy with China is still reckoning how to
[Guest 2]: deal with this country that a decade ago we were being compared to, but not really anymore,
[Guest 2]: right? So it's clear that the gap that India and China had at one particular time has now
[Guest 2]: widened to the point that China is definitely a player who you can't ignore on the world
[Guest 2]: stage. Whereas India, perhaps you can still ignore it on the global stage. Shivani, what
[Guest 1]: do you think about the neighborhood? So to your point about how India is dealing with
[Guest 1]: China, I think I completely agree. Both sides are trying to figure out how to cope with
[Guest 1]: the other. There is a significant power asymmetry between the two. I think there is an acknowledgement
[Guest 1]: of that existing. Unless India is able to catch up with the economic development and
[Guest 1]: growth that China is seeing, that power asymmetry is going to exist. That said, how India is
[Guest 1]: approaching China is trying to see what are the issues where India and China can cooperate,
[Guest 1]: what are issues that they will always have competition or conflict in, and what are some
[Guest 1]: of the areas where they will just coexist. That seems to be my understanding. Shivani,
[Guest 2]: I was just thinking while you were talking about this. I'm not sure India will ever be
[Guest 2]: able to catch up with China in that sense. The Chinese style of growth is simply not
[Guest 2]: possible here. And one of the reasons why I say that is because China doesn't have to
[Guest 2]: ever worry about things like land acquisition, because there is no concept of property rights.
[Guest 2]: So if your land gets taken over by the government, oh, too bad. Here is a payout that the government
[Guest 2]: might or might not award you. And that's it. Whereas in India, if you look at development
[Guest 2]: projects or something like that, which often gets talked about, with the one belt, one
[Guest 2]: road, particularly in South Asia, there's often a lot that's talked about about, oh,
[Guest 2]: India doesn't do these projects really quickly. And if you look at a lot of these projects,
[Guest 2]: particularly in the neighborhood and even developmental projects within India, land
[Guest 2]: acquisition is a huge problem in any society which is not centralized or which the government
[Amit Varma]: does not play a huge hand in. But you know, Hamsini, I'll just say that that's just one
[Amit Varma]: aspect of I agree with you, we'll never catch up with them. The reason for that, that not
[Amit Varma]: just is that China is too authoritarian, but also that India is too authoritarian in another
[Amit Varma]: direction. China is too authoritarian in the direction of sort of, you know, all of the
[Amit Varma]: things that you pointed out that there is no friction between getting things done, so
[Amit Varma]: to say, India is too authoritarian in the way of, in the sense of standing in the way
[Amit Varma]: of free markets, you know, starting from Nehru soft socialism to Indira Gandhi and to Modi
[Amit Varma]: today, where, you know, given the fact that, given our population, which was a great strength,
[Amit Varma]: we, you know, we could have dominated labor intensive manufacturing from the 70s onwards,
[Amit Varma]: before China got into the game, and got serious about it. And we missed all of those opportunities.
[Amit Varma]: So while I agree with you that we won't catch up with them, it's not just because they are
[Amit Varma]: doing something wrong, and we can't do that wrong thing, we are also messing up really
[Amit Varma]: massively in terms of the economy. The other sort of, you know, when you were talking earlier
[Amit Varma]: about how we can often, you know, commit the narrative fallacy, I think, though you're
[Amit Varma]: in use those words, and assume that hey, China has a cogent vision, and they don't necessarily
[Amit Varma]: do and it was sort of interesting that, you know, to my mind, firstly, if you have a vision
[Amit Varma]: for communicating what your vision should be, then you could argue that you actually
[Amit Varma]: do have a vision. And, and secondly, the thing is that even if you, regardless of what your
[Amit Varma]: intent or vision might be, if your actions are cogent and moving in a certain direction,
[Amit Varma]: and it seems to the outsider that you do have a vision, then in a de facto sense, it doesn't
[Amit Varma]: really make a difference of what your original intent was. So I'll go back to the question
[Amit Varma]: that I kind of asked earlier about now, you know, for those of my listeners were kind
[Amit Varma]: of not aware of the belt and road initiative, and what a big deal it is in geopolitical
[Amit Varma]: terms. And, you know, how it is both changing the game and a reflection of how much the
[Amit Varma]: game has changed. You know, Shibani, would you like to chat a little bit about that?
[Guest 1]: The Belt and Road Initiative, if you break it down to simple terms is a trade network
[Guest 1]: that spreads across the entire world, allowing China access to a lot of markets, but also
[Guest 1]: giving it opportunities in terms of the BRI thing. So it's a trade network giving China
[Guest 1]: access to new markets across the world. It is a very important foreign policy initiative
[Guest 1]: of the Chinese government. And what you see, India is not on board with the BRI. And that's
[Guest 1]: because it feels that it's a little imprudent. It doesn't want to give China the kind of
[Guest 1]: control that BRI agreements sort of allow for. And we see that increasingly in the Indian
[Guest 1]: subcontinent, a lot of states, including Pakistan, are a part of the BRI. And that is adding
[Guest 1]: to the insecurity that India feels towards China.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And there is also, you know, a dual sense of BRI where one is that, look, it's
[Amit Varma]: a trade network and it's positive some, but there is also the fear that they are sort
[Amit Varma]: of building these dependencies so that all of these nations, including Pakistan and nations
[Amit Varma]: in the region sort of become more and more dependent on China and kind of have to listen
[Amit Varma]: to them. And what is India's approach to this? And what should be India's approach to this?
[Guest 2]: Just a couple of things. So the one belt, one road by Shivani is right in saying that,
[Guest 2]: you know, it's exploring new markets. And this is why I was saying that a lot of this
[Guest 2]: is the narrative fallacy or even a confirmation bias, Amit, is because the Belt and Road now
[Guest 2]: includes projects that were started in the nineties, you know, and it just subsumes a
[Guest 2]: lot of these projects under what was launched three, four years ago. And, you know, repackages
[Guest 2]: all of this under nice new branding.
[Amit Varma]: You're making she sound like Modi ji now. Modi she.
[Guest 2]: No, but it is what it is in the sense that a lot of the projects that are now claimed
[Guest 2]: by the Belt and Road didn't start out as Belt and Road projects. They just started out as
[Guest 2]: development projects and then became part of the Belt and Road. And I agree with Shivani
[Guest 2]: that earlier we were talking about Xi's assertiveness and the Belt and Road really
[Guest 2]: fits into sort of China's giant strategy, perhaps. But a lot of things really don't
[Guest 2]: add up for it. And you can see it just in the way that the Belt and Road unfolds. Right.
[Guest 2]: I was at an overland port in Chengdu, near Chengdu, which is supposed to be where a train
[Guest 2]: starts from Chengdu and goes all the way up to Poland. Right. And it was very interesting
[Guest 2]: to be there also because when I was there, we noticed that Nepal was not part of the
[Guest 2]: world map. Only it was indicated as part of China. Borders were wrong. And a lot of people
[Guest 2]: raised objections to what was happening. And to my mind, I would just think that, you know,
[Guest 2]: if you're starting an international project that's communicating your vision to the world,
[Guest 2]: you wouldn't want to offend a small country that is already very easily offended. So anyway,
[Guest 2]: that was sort of just my tangential experience into what the BRI could sometimes look like
[Guest 2]: on the ground. But I think one of India's reasons for staying away from the BRI is a very real
[Guest 2]: issue of sovereignty. Now, the biggest project off the Belt and Road is the China-Pakistan
[Guest 2]: Economic Corridor. And this is a corridor that passes from China through Xinjiang,
[Guest 2]: through the Pakistan-occupied Kashmir border, all the way down to Gwadar. So this is not just
[Guest 2]: a highway. This is also a port. These are pipelines, electricity grids, internet,
[Guest 2]: fiber optic cables, anything and everything that you can think of has come under this project.
[Guest 2]: And why India objects to it is because at the end of the day, India does not accept that the
[Guest 2]: China-Pakistan border is valid because India still believes that this goes against India's
[Guest 2]: sovereignty. And that is the main reason why India cites, at least that's the main reason
[Guest 2]: that India cites for not being part of the Belt and Road Initiative. China has tried to get India
[Guest 2]: to be part of the Belt and Road Initiative for many years. And I honestly, particularly now,
[Guest 2]: don't see that happening because the Indian government has recently been announcing that
[Guest 2]: all Chinese investments are going to come under additional scrutiny. About a month ago,
[Guest 2]: the Ministry of Corporate Affairs actually passed a new law which said that some sort of Chinese
[Guest 2]: investments were going to come under additional scrutiny. And we know that bureaucracy is a pain.
[Guest 2]: So a lot of things are happening, at least to indicate that China, that India does not
[Guest 2]: definitely want to be part of the Belt and Road Initiative. And I think that is something that
[Guest 2]: is set to continue. This is at least my reading of the Belt and Road.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, coming back to the present time, and listeners have kind of stuck with this episode
[Amit Varma]: for so long, wondering that, but what about the Galwan Valley? Why did they attack us now?
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, give me give me a sense of what is China thinking now? Like, of course, they do
[Amit Varma]: things when the rest of the world is distracted, as we know, from the 62 war itself, because the
[Amit Varma]: Cuban Missile Crisis is going on. And yeah, okay, the big boys are busy. And let's, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the dip tower mamla with India in the meantime. But now you would imagine, you know, the whole
[Amit Varma]: world is kind of struggling with the pandemic, including India. So what is China's game here?
[Amit Varma]: You know, it would seem to me that whatever little gains that you want to make in terms of
[Amit Varma]: borders, you know, minute gains in territory at best, they don't have imperialistic ambitions.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, so what's going on? What's what's happening?
[Guest 2]: So my reading of the current crisis and what's happening is that, you know,
[Guest 2]: through this whole podcast, I also spoke about this when we were discussing the 1980s,
[Guest 2]: that China wanted to separate the issue of border and other things that we could have in common.
[Guest 2]: And that's sort of the pattern that our cooperation over the last 20 years has formed,
[Guest 2]: right? Particularly in the last couple of years, you have informal summits that are happening,
[Guest 2]: you have more trade and so on. But with the current crisis, India is the one that's keen
[Guest 2]: for the border to be resolved. Because this, at the end of the day, is something that
[Guest 2]: occupies Indian imagination a lot. And this is India's largest border. So it's no wonder that
[Guest 2]: India, that it's India's largest occupation, right? For the Chinese, on the other hand,
[Guest 2]: this is something that they've shown in the past in the South China Sea as well,
[Guest 2]: is that they're very content to play the long game in this, you know, to construct a couple
[Guest 2]: of small islands, someone will protest, they will retreat, and then they will construct a
[Guest 2]: couple of more islands, someone will protest until the status quo is changed. So I think,
[Guest 2]: at least my reading of what is happening currently is that we spoke about M. Taylor
[Guest 2]: Francis in the first half of the episode, and his thesis that China is more willing
[Guest 2]: to compromise when there is an internal crisis, and more willing to go head to head on over a
[Guest 2]: confrontation whenever there's an external crisis. And I think that is particularly telling now.
[Guest 2]: I think China feels that the world is distracted enough, which is why you have a national security
[Guest 2]: law that is being passed in Hong Kong. It is why you have some tensions with Vietnam in the South
[Guest 2]: China Sea. The other thing that I think is quite important to remember is that when India made
[Guest 2]: Ladakh a Union Territory last year, China again registered protests, like we'd spoken about
[Guest 2]: multiple times. And this really seems to have pushed China's buttons somewhere. And so this
[Guest 2]: aggression could also be a reaction of what happened with Kashmir, and the abrogation of
[Guest 1]: treason. Hamsini made some really important point about China playing the long game. And I
[Guest 1]: completely agree with that. The sort of scuffles and minor conflicts along the LAC are not something
[Guest 1]: new. Even if we look back just the last decade, this is sort of status quo for both India and
[Guest 1]: China. There'll be like an occasional crossfire and stuff like that. The public claim over Galwan
[Guest 1]: Valley is new, but the territorial dispute as we have discussed isn't. And I would also agree with
[Guest 1]: Hamsini that it's not just China taking an assertive position against India. There are other
[Guest 1]: conflicts that it's bringing up. Taiwan, Hong Kong, all of these are in the news again. It's
[Guest 1]: all happening simultaneously. What Hamsini spoke about is one school of thought that
[Guest 1]: this is opportunism. The world is distracted by the coronavirus. So China is just looking at this
[Guest 1]: as a chance to create some trouble because governments are distracted with a public health emergency.
[Guest 1]: The other argument is that it's again acting out of deep insecurity, and that it's just a
[Guest 1]: continuation of the strategic objectives that China has. It just seems like the timing of it
[Guest 1]: is extraordinary because we have a pandemic. But for China, regardless of that, it's continuing on
[Guest 1]: its sort of... So those are the two broad positions that people are taking about this.
[Guest 1]: Yeah. So two points that Hamsini mentioned about the BRI that I wanted to add to. First is that
[Guest 1]: not everything is going well with the Belt and Road Initiative. Last month, the Chinese foreign
[Guest 1]: ministry said that projects under the BRI had suffered significantly during the pandemic
[Guest 1]: because a lot of the infrastructure development had to be shut down, and it was incurring a
[Guest 1]: big financial cost. So while they have accepted that this is a huge economic cost for China,
[Guest 1]: I'd also like to point out a lot of the infrastructure projects that China is investing
[Guest 1]: in, it is not sure whether it will get the return on the investment that it's making.
[Guest 1]: There is no guarantee that these projects will bring back all the money, at least all the money
[Guest 1]: that's going into them. You have the question of Afghanistan. China really wants the BRI to
[Guest 1]: sort of take off there, but there are concerns about terrorism and the safety of the Chinese
[Guest 1]: people living, staying in Afghanistan. So it's trying to get Pakistan to sort of mediate that
[Guest 1]: discussion. And the other point I wanted to make about India's opposition to the BRI based on
[Guest 1]: sovereignty, of the BRI going against the sovereignty of the country. This is the same
[Guest 1]: argument that India uses to convince other nations in the Indian subcontinent to be careful of China.
[Guest 1]: There's constant reminders to both, you know, you keep going back to the Sri Lankan example,
[Guest 1]: remember the debt trap, remember Hambantota, be careful about what your engagement is like with
[Guest 1]: China when it comes to the BRI. And we see that sort of Bangladesh is listening. We know that
[Guest 1]: there was some renegotiation of the loan terms with China. Maldives has also asked for, you know,
[Guest 1]: renegotiating those terms again. So yeah, those are the two things I had to say.
[Guest 2]: I think Shibani, one thing that you've raised a very pertinent point is that these countries are
[Guest 2]: revising terms. And I think, you know, the sort of the good thing about China being in the
[Guest 2]: neighborhood, and I don't know if we can characterize it as a good thing, but is that
[Guest 2]: for the first time in a very long time, countries in the Indian subcontinent have an alternative,
[Guest 2]: right? And what happens with smaller powers is that they generally hedge bigger powers against
[Guest 2]: each other and then sort of scramble for what's left. And it's perfectly understandable. And I
[Guest 2]: think a lot of countries are renegotiating the terms of the BRI because they don't want to be
[Guest 2]: stuck in debt traps. And I think they're very aware of the threats that could come with it.
[Guest 2]: The other thing I think is that it really betrays the failure that India has in terms of delivering
[Guest 2]: on some of these projects in the region. And this is also forcing them to revise deals with India.
[Guest 2]: And I guess this would now then be up to India to provide better projects. And that is something
[Amit Varma]: that we ought to be able to do. I sort of like you're phrasing here if it's a good thing that
[Amit Varma]: China is in the neighborhood as if we have an option that a China moved away one day,
[Amit Varma]: the China is now between us and Canada and let them deal with, you know, the big guy.
[Amit Varma]: That's kind of a great point that you raised that, you know, it's really a good deal for all
[Amit Varma]: the smaller nations that both China and India are trying to bangle influence and spend their money
[Amit Varma]: and kind of doing all of that. And they can play this competition off and they can play India China
[Amit Varma]: off against each other and some good can come out of it. And because all trade is a positive
[Amit Varma]: something, it could be good for China and India as well. But is India as focused towards all of
[Amit Varma]: these like the one of course, you would argue that this is an important lever that we have
[Amit Varma]: that if we engage more deeply and try to increase our influence among all of these nations,
[Amit Varma]: where China also wants to play a big role, then that's a sort of a lever we have to keep China
[Amit Varma]: at bay and to sort of balance that. But my question there is one, are we doing enough of
[Amit Varma]: that? And two, do we really have like what are the levers that we really have? Because one of
[Amit Varma]: the things that became obvious in this whole Galwan Valley thing is that regardless of how
[Amit Varma]: China looks at it, we can't afford for this thing to escalate. Because any kind of war nuclear or
[Amit Varma]: otherwise, it's just going to be bad for us beyond the point we can't let it escalate. So then the
[Amit Varma]: question comes up, what are the levers that we have by which we can influence China's behavior?
[Guest 1]: I would say that India is not doing enough in the neighborhood. And to a certain extent, it just
[Guest 1]: underestimates the allies that it has right around it. And I say this because the efforts
[Guest 1]: to build relationships with the neighbors has not been consistent. It's episodic. And I would say
[Guest 1]: that the states in the neighborhood see India as only if it moves too close to China will India
[Guest 1]: get involved. Otherwise, India doesn't have a stake in the country, which is very unfortunate.
[Guest 1]: I think India as a country needs to make consistent efforts to ensure the neighbors that it is a
[Guest 1]: presence, it is there for support, it is going to balance out the Chinese influence, because
[Guest 1]: the Chinese influence is also not something that all neighbors are very happy about. Both India
[Guest 1]: and China seem to sort of interfere with the internal politics of the smaller states. And that
[Guest 1]: is not appreciated by these countries. But talking about the Indian side, it seems like sometimes
[Guest 1]: India doesn't care. I can't recall the name, but there was an Indian publication that got
[Guest 1]: the name of the king of Bhutan wrong. So they used a picture of the current king, but used the name
[Guest 1]: of his predecessor. And these are small things. I mean, they appear to be small things for India,
[Guest 1]: but it is a big deal for Bhutan, it is going to impact your relationship. That said, the neighbors
[Guest 1]: also are very aware of the leverage that they hold, both against India and China. And they're
[Amit Varma]: not afraid to use it to balance the two. The other part of my question was, what can India do now?
[Amit Varma]: Like if you put yourself in the Prime Minister's shoes, what are the options he had on the day that
[Amit Varma]: the news about the Galwan Valley broke? Like, okay, so many of our soldiers have been killed
[Amit Varma]: by the Chinese. But what can we do? And I guess it's a two part question. One is what can we do
[Amit Varma]: in terms of controlling sort of the domestic fallout of this, which they are trying to
[Amit Varma]: sort of manipulate through, where they're trying to sort of build this narrative of Oh, nothing
[Amit Varma]: but we taught them a lesson at the same time by banning TikTok. But apart from that, what are the
[Amit Varma]: realistic options that are on the table? What could Modi have done? What can Modi do?
[Guest 1]: The way I see it is that there is no one right answer to this. There have to be multiple
[Guest 1]: approaches that have to be used simultaneously as India engages with China. The first is external
[Guest 1]: balancing, which I think India does well with the bigger powers, but fails to do with the
[Guest 1]: allies within the neighborhood. So I would say building institutional relationships in the Indian
[Guest 1]: subcontinent that are not driven just by personalities or, you know, the heads of state,
[Guest 1]: because that is temporary. But if you are able to establish institutional relationships that
[Guest 1]: go beyond personalities and administrations, I think that would be more fruitful. And the second
[Guest 1]: approach, I think, is again, continuous engagement with China. We can't just frown and say,
[Guest 1]: I'm not going to talk to you. Dialogue has to go on, engagement in areas where you can cooperate
[Guest 1]: with one another is necessary, because there is an economic dependency that India has with China.
[Guest 1]: And any move that will harm India economically is, I don't think it makes sense, because
[Guest 1]: you're trying to prove a point, but you're also harming your own economy. So yeah, I don't think
[Guest 1]: there has to be engagement, it has to be done in a wise manner.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and I think that's what when you know, people use the term economic warfare, they,
[Amit Varma]: they don't get it that the point is that anything you do against the economy of the other country
[Amit Varma]: also harms the people of your own country, like, you know, banning Chinese products, for example,
[Amit Varma]: would actually be hurting your own people more than anything else. So I'm not sure people who
[Amit Varma]: don't use TikTok much would kind of agree with that.
[Guest 1]: I'm just going to borrow an analogy from Manoj Kevalramani who wrote this in the Hindustan
[Guest 1]: Times, he said, if you are going to spit on someone else, make sure you don't cut your own
[Guest 1]: nose while doing it.
[Amit Varma]: That's mixing metaphors, actually, Manoj needs to attend my writing class,
[Amit Varma]: so our final China scholar, but I'm not sure if this particular sentence, I thought it'll
[Amit Varma]: be something like this, just make sure you aren't so close to him that it bounces back on you,
[Amit Varma]: which would have been Yeah, but oh my god, why have you put that picture in my head?
[Guest 2]: You know, in Tamil, we have a saying that says if you throw a stone into the gutter,
[Guest 2]: it will splash back at you.
[Amit Varma]: That's better.
[Guest 2]: Sorry, Manoj. No, so a couple of thoughts on what you were saying on what we could do,
[Guest 2]: right. And I think this, apart from the policy options that are on the table that I will leave
[Guest 2]: to our extremely qualified bureaucrats to get to, I think there are some fundamental
[Guest 2]: institutional problems within the Indian government that we need to address, Amit.
[Guest 2]: And I think the first is that the economic moves that we're talking about, right,
[Guest 2]: is I've argued against this app ban for various reasons. And the smallest ones being that,
[Guest 2]: you know, consumer choice will be limited. And this is going to backfire on India's tech scene,
[Guest 2]: which desperately needs investments. But the other thing is that India needs to realize that
[Guest 2]: its whole bargaining power on the world stage comes from its economy. No one wants to deal with
[Guest 2]: a large poor country, Amit. Those exist. We want to have nothing to do with them. And we cannot
[Guest 2]: afford to be them. So your economic policy is not fungible as your foreign policy. Your strong
[Guest 2]: economy needs to be the basis for you to have a strong foreign policy. You know, even with the
[Guest 2]: coronavirus, there's been so much talk about how global supply chains are going to shift at the
[Guest 2]: end of this. What has India done to actually take advantage of this shifting of the global supply
[Guest 2]: chains? We talk about ease of doing business and so on, but I really don't see a lot of that
[Guest 2]: extending beyond Mumbai and Delhi. And we can see that, you know, countries like Vietnam,
[Guest 2]: countries like Bangladesh are getting a lot of industries that are now moving out of China.
[Guest 2]: China, because it is developing, is shifting some of its more labor-intensive industries.
[Guest 2]: To its poorer regions and to other countries in Southeast Asia. So this is something that at the
[Guest 2]: end of the day, we should have considered. The other thing that I would say is that, you know,
[Guest 2]: we talk about India's soft power in terms of Bollywood and yoga. But I remember Brookings
[Guest 2]: recently having a report out that talks about how South Asian students, not Indian, South Asian,
[Guest 2]: are now flocking to China. And earlier, a lot of these students would come to India, but we no
[Guest 2]: longer have globally competitive educational institutions. And even when we do, our society
[Guest 2]: is xenophobic to students from all around the world. And therefore, India is not an attractive
[Guest 2]: place to come and stay. I think the other thing is that, you know, we have a lot of
[Guest 2]: students from all over the world who want to come and stay. I think the other thing is that,
[Guest 2]: you know, Indians fundamentally want to take a strong line against China. And I understand this.
[Guest 2]: We should be ready to stand up to a bully at any point in time. We should be prepared
[Guest 2]: to escalate crises. However, I think we need to fundamentally assess if that is the only line
[Guest 2]: something with China happens. This is something that I hear that we need to take a strong line
[Guest 2]: against China. I was actually hearing some intellectuals who were saying we shouldn't
[Guest 2]: have Indian students who go study in China. And I'm opposed to this for personal reasons as well.
[Guest 2]: But I think, you know, they were saying if Indian students will study in China, they will not take
[Guest 2]: a strong line for India. And I think a lot of this goes back to Indian scholarship about China. And
[Guest 2]: this is something that I'm very passionate about because bread and butter. But we have a fundamental
[Guest 2]: lack of Indian scholars who are working very deeply with Chinese issues. We have very few
[Guest 2]: scholars in the country who can speak the language fluently. We have very few scholars who've lived
[Guest 2]: in China who understand China. Now, I've had a lot of people say, you know, this is foreign policy.
[Guest 2]: All states are the same. Why do you need to have exposure to China? Why do you need to have to live
[Guest 2]: there? You know, your foreign policy against China should be the same as your foreign policy towards
[Guest 2]: South Korea, if that's who you're bordering. I can understand that argument. But I think
[Guest 2]: that we still have a fundamental lack of primary knowledge about Chinese systemic thinking
[Guest 2]: and Chinese foreign policy. Everything that our policymakers depend on seem to come from
[Guest 2]: American scholarship or Western scholarship. And therefore, I would actually argue that this is
[Guest 2]: where we should be nationalist. We should be more nationalist about having knowledge systems
[Guest 2]: that would inform our policymakers. So I think when you say what can we do whenever we have a
[Guest 2]: crisis, we can present our policymakers with better options. And the way we do that is to build
[Guest 2]: domestic structures and systems of knowledge that provide the best policy solutions.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, I'm taking three thoughts away from that. One is, of course, as you said, and I
[Amit Varma]: completely agree, the importance of economic growth for foreign policy. You know, your ex-colleague
[Amit Varma]: Nitin Pai once wrote a piece which had the headline, India's best foreign policy is 8%
[Amit Varma]: economic growth. And I couldn't agree more. And you said it very well when you said that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, economic policy is not fungible, foreign policy may, but in terms of economics, we just have
[Amit Varma]: to aim for that kind of growth. And I completely agree with you that homegrown scholarship with
[Amit Varma]: experience within China is important. Yes, you can look at all states as rational actors and
[Amit Varma]: therefore draw whatever conclusions you draw from that. But the granularity of your understanding of
[Amit Varma]: you know, the nuances of how a particular people might think about a particular problem or about
[Amit Varma]: you know, what the popular imagination within the country is, which will also shape what its
[Amit Varma]: leaders think and, you know, create the incentives that they respond to, that is also incredibly
[Amit Varma]: important. And, you know, the third point on which you expressed yourself so strongly, and I agree
[Amit Varma]: with you is that we need to build intellectual capacity on these matters. I think in a lot of
[Amit Varma]: matters in our policy, not just foreign policy, but other policy, there is my sense from the outside
[Amit Varma]: that we are ruled by inertia, that there are these practices of the past, some bad practices, some
[Amit Varma]: perhaps not so bad, but they just continue out of inertia, because that's the way things have
[Amit Varma]: always been. And we need to build intellectual capacity on the outside of these institutions.
[Amit Varma]: But, you know, within our country and engaging deeply with China in this context, so that we
[Amit Varma]: can take those learnings kind of in a crisis like this. And if we had that intellectual capacity,
[Amit Varma]: and we see the stirrings of it, among the two fine scholars who are with me on the show right now,
[Amit Varma]: thought experiment I would post to them, and therefore I will post for you is this, that,
[Amit Varma]: okay, we are sort of assuming that these are sort of the things that we should do in the long term,
[Amit Varma]: we should have 8% economic growth, we should have greater engagement with all our countries in the
[Amit Varma]: region, we should, you know, as Nitin keeps saying, maybe also show some involvement in the
[Amit Varma]: South China Sea so that that also becomes a lever where, which we can use against China. But the
[Amit Varma]: thought experiment is that supposing they are far more belligerent, and they want everything now,
[Amit Varma]: and they want every dispute settled in their favor now, and they are acting with men coming
[Amit Varma]: across the border and tanks and whatever, supposing you know, that is their approach,
[Amit Varma]: how are we to handle it? Supposing you know, Mr. Modi does get that communique that they have
[Amit Varma]: crossed the line of control, and they have said that x area is ours. How are we to, are there
[Amit Varma]: realistic ways of tackling it? Do we sort of get into a conflict where enormous damage could be
[Amit Varma]: caused? Do we just roll over and sort of give them what they want? How would you think about that?
[Guest 2]: So suppose China is more belligerent, suppose they cross the border tomorrow.
[Guest 2]: I think something that we haven't really discussed a little is the role of nuclear
[Guest 2]: weapons, right? At the end of the day, India and China are both nuclear weapon states.
[Guest 2]: And therefore, if there is a war like scenario, there would be a threshold of escalation,
[Guest 2]: after which one of the countries would choose to go nuclear. Now, theoretically, before this
[Guest 2]: threshold is reached, a lot more international actors will be concerned that this could lead
[Guest 2]: to mutual annihilation. And therefore, there will be de-escalation. But I think if there is
[Guest 2]: aggression from the Chinese in blatantly, you know, marching through India's territory and claiming
[Guest 2]: large chunks of land, India is not the India of 1962. We can sort of compare militaries and
[Guest 2]: things like that. But I think India would be in a position where at that point in time, they could
[Guest 2]: provide a reaction that leads to escalation. What I'm saying is that I think India would be willing
[Guest 2]: to escalate. And that's a little bit of what was seen in the government crisis as well. And I think
[Guest 2]: it's important to note that a lot of our military structures do exist and are prepared for
[Guest 2]: escalation in this manner. But I would, at the end of the day, discount a huge war happening
[Amit Varma]: because we are nuclear power states. Yeah, I mean, that's assuming both people are rational
[Amit Varma]: actors and treat each other as rational actors. Because if we sort of go back to game theory in
[Amit Varma]: the game of chicken, for example, about who is more irrational or who can sort of show themselves
[Amit Varma]: to be more irrational. And it's clear to all concerned that at some point, Modi has to back
[Amit Varma]: down. That, you know, if things start escalating, she knows that Modi has to back down at some
[Amit Varma]: point. There will be more international pressure on India than on China, you know, given the levers
[Amit Varma]: that other nations have and we are far weaker. And there is sort of this fog of uncertainty about
[Amit Varma]: how China's actors think and what they will do, at least relative to India. But anyway, maybe I'm
[Amit Varma]: just analysing a thought experiment too much. But I'm just doing that because it just seems to me
[Amit Varma]: that anybody in on Modi's seat just has really difficult choices before him. My view is that
[Guest 1]: should sort of China be aggressive, India will act in a manner that displays its military capability
[Guest 1]: to take China on, but be careful enough not to escalate. And that's a very fine balance. But I
[Guest 1]: think that is that is going to be the objective of the Indian side.
[Amit Varma]: Wasn't that Nehru's forward policy?
[Guest 1]: Yes, but I don't think India would, the cost of going to war is something that that the Indian
[Guest 1]: that the Indian side realises, the financial, the social, the political cost of going to war,
[Guest 1]: which is why it would sort of restrain from escalating. From the Chinese side, I mean,
[Guest 1]: you were saying that, you know, India would face a lot more international pressure than China would.
[Guest 1]: But my understanding is that China is not ready to face the isolation that would come from,
[Guest 1]: you know, such an escalation. And maybe that is one of the considerations that the Chinese side
[Amit Varma]: will have.
[Amit Varma]: Realistically, do you think anybody would isolate them? You can't afford to isolate
[Amit Varma]: yourself from China. I mean, even we haven't done it despite banning a few apps, but we can't really
[Amit Varma]: do it because otherwise, you know, a lot of our electricity comes from machines made in China.
[Amit Varma]: You know, Vivek Kaul and I did an episode of Econ Central on this. If Indians want to really
[Amit Varma]: boycott China, they'll have to stop drinking milk in many places because your dairy production
[Amit Varma]: equipment comes from there.
[Guest 2]: Amit, I was actually thinking about this and just because it's a thought experiment, right?
[Guest 2]: If you look fundamentally at the history of wars across the world, you will see the weaker power
[Guest 2]: as acting more irrational, right? Like if there was going to be a fight between North and South
[Guest 2]: Korea, you would expect more pressure on South Korea than on the North, right? And therefore,
[Guest 2]: I would actually argue that if there is a showdown between India and China, then India can afford to
[Guest 2]: act more irrational than China. I know that then I'm in a sense arguing for being more irrational
[Guest 2]: than the Chinese is, you know, essentially going to leave the whole world blind.
[Amit Varma]: But you can say that with a veil of ignorance, but we know that Modi is in charge. And I don't
[Amit Varma]: mean this as a knock on Modi, but whoever the Indian Prime Minister is, we know that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: what Shabani said very wisely is that we have to show our military strength, but not actually
[Amit Varma]: escalate. Now, the thing is, they know this. They know that no matter what happens, there won't be
[Amit Varma]: a war, because we have to back down. They know this. It is simply no way. Now, it's a different
[Amit Varma]: matter that fortunately, China is outside of the thought experiment. They are not quite as
[Amit Varma]: belligerent. But thinking aloud from my possibly naive view, it would seem to me that they can
[Guest 2]: basically get away with anything. You know, Amit, in the international system, the strong
[Guest 2]: will eat and the weak is meat. But again, I'm going to say that just because now during this
[Guest 2]: thought experiment, we can't come up with definite reasons for what we can do apart from backing
[Guest 2]: down. Maybe what we need is an extremely crazy Prime Minister who's willing to signal absolute
[Guest 2]: irrationality. Maybe that is something that our policymakers should consider.
[Amit Varma]: You know, that's a thought that struck me the other day that if Yogi Adityanath was PM,
[Amit Varma]: then the Chinese would have to be more wary. But then the problem is that solves your geopolitical
[Amit Varma]: problem. But what about your internal domestic governance problem? You know, you'll have
[Amit Varma]: encounter Raj all over India and not just in UP. But leaving that aside, that was an amusing
[Amit Varma]: thought experiment. And you have you both of you have given me this fascinating trip through
[Amit Varma]: history and perspective. And I'll also link all my other episodes on China in the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: So thank you so much for coming on the show and giving me so much of your time. And before I sort
[Amit Varma]: of before we wrap it up, you know what I'm going to ask, isn't it, which is the sort of the staple
[Amit Varma]: question of all my sort of episodes and whatever subjects I do. And I'll turn to Shibani first and
[Amit Varma]: then Hamsini, which is that if you are to sort of if I ask you to look at the year 2030, as far as
[Amit Varma]: India China relations are concerned, what's the best case scenario and what's the worst case
[Guest 1]: scenario? 2030 best case scenario is that both sides that the memory of war is strong on either
[Guest 1]: side. And that is why they don't enter into war with each other to avoid the cost that war carries
[Amit Varma]: with it. If the memory of war is strong on both sides, that means there's been a war between now
[Guest 1]: and then. No, I'm saying from, you know, the history of India and China. Oh, okay. Yeah,
[Guest 1]: fair enough. That memory from the history of India and China carries forward to that time. And it's
[Guest 1]: not a new generation that thinks bombing the hell out of the other is the way to go. And what's the
[Guest 1]: worst case scenario? Worst case scenario is that there's a generation that forgets the cost of
[Guest 1]: going to war. And I would also think, see, one of the things that I wanted to point out earlier
[Guest 1]: about nuclear weapons in the India China equation is, while both sides have nuclear weapons, the
[Guest 1]: relationship in that domain has been stable. The use of nuclear weapons in any conflict between
[Guest 1]: India and China has not been mentioned. When you compare that with India and Pakistan, where
[Guest 1]: as soon as there is some sort of conflict, immediately someone somewhere will mention,
[Guest 1]: we'll use nukes. In 2019, there was talks from the Indian Ministry of Defense that,
[Guest 1]: you know, India is willing to review its position of no first use of nuclear weapons,
[Guest 1]: if that is required. And that was in context of what was happening between India and Pakistan
[Guest 1]: at the time. But with India and China, that's never been the case. India saw China's acquiring
[Guest 1]: of nuclear weapons as its claim to, you know, being a global power never felt threatened by it.
[Guest 1]: And China has understood India's, you know, growing nuclear arsenal as security against
[Guest 1]: Pakistan and that, you know, the insecurity within the Indian subcontinent is what is driving that.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I think your worst case scenario is that we end up in a conflict which is brutal for both
[Amit Varma]: sides, because of a generation that forgot the memories of war, right? That's your...
[Amit Varma]: Hamsini, you are part of a generation which grew up well after the last war.
[Amit Varma]: What do you remember? Even I am, in fact.
[Guest 2]: That's true. I mean, actually, yeah, I would... What are your memories of the narrative around
[Guest 2]: China when you were growing up, Amit, before I answer my question?
[Amit Varma]: I have no memories. Yeah, there were narratives around Pakistan all the time,
[Amit Varma]: and they are still pretty much the same. And thankfully, the narrative around capitalists
[Amit Varma]: has changed a little bit. They're not all evil. But apart from that, you know, I don't remember
[Amit Varma]: narratives around the Chinese, but we Indians as a people have always been so xenophobic and racist,
[Amit Varma]: frankly, but leaving that aside.
[Guest 2]: Okay. I think, Amit, best case scenario is that the border between India and China
[Guest 2]: is like the border between Russia and China. And what this essentially means is that the border
[Guest 2]: is settled. It's resolved amicably, whatever amicably could mean. I'm not going to get into
[Guest 2]: the nitty gritties of who gave what to whom, but you have a border with border ports. You
[Guest 2]: can have tourism. You can cross into from one side of the Himalayas to the other and
[Guest 2]: walk into Yunnan from Arunachal Pradesh. That would be best case scenario for me.
[Guest 2]: And because I think if you resolve this, then a lot of other things may possibly
[Guest 2]: take off and take off well. Worst case scenario would obviously be
[Guest 2]: conflict, but conflict could also lead to the resolution of these borders in some way or the
[Guest 2]: other, right? I think what I would be very afraid of is an India that wants to catch up with China
[Guest 2]: that wants to posture aggressively, indulges in, you know, building up its arms and
[Guest 2]: overdrawing the Indian economy to sort of signal strength. I'm afraid that India would sort of
[Guest 2]: repeat the mistakes of the Soviet Union in that sense, the Soviet Union of the 80s,
[Guest 2]: essentially. And that is what I would be even more scared of, because it's very easy for us
[Guest 2]: to think in terms of foreign policy and what India should do. But I think it's the work at
[Guest 2]: the background, particularly what's happening with the economy that fundamentally worries me
[Guest 2]: in a short term 10 year scenario. Yeah. And, you know, unsurprisingly, you have packed in a
[Amit Varma]: profound thought, which I'll unpack in my own words, which is basically, you know, people often
[Amit Varma]: look at narrative and reality as a binary, and they will look at a government as a government
[Amit Varma]: that can construct a narrative that has nothing to do with reality as if it is a harmless thing.
[Amit Varma]: But the point is, narratives can shape reality. And if we build this narrative where we are this
[Amit Varma]: macho, aggressive nation state that takes no shit from others, then that narrative could shape our
[Amit Varma]: reality in ways that might lead to your worst case scenario. Hamsini and Shibani, you've both
[Amit Varma]: been extremely patient. So thank you for coming on the show and for your time and your insights.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you, Amit. This was a lot of fun.
[Guest 2]: Thanks for having us, Amit. This is really good.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, you can follow all of us on Twitter.
[Amit Varma]: Hamsini is at Hamsini H. Shibani is at Mehtasaurus. That's M-E-H-T-A-S-A-U-R-U-S.
[Amit Varma]: And I am at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A. You can browse past episodes of The Seen and The Unseen
[Amit Varma]: at SeenUnseen.in. Thank you for listening.
[Amit Varma]: Transcribed by https://otter.ai